O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign and unknown throughout, its knowledge has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it but the slight descriptions found in books by the ancients, which our hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, closed intentions, and knowledge has been removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I will animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation for it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good hand-masters are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as long as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins, and the number of ears, and the movement and of the blood vessels moving and resting, and where they come from.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And Hypocras says that what is known by name is little, but what is known by action is much; and the same is true in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned earlier, be careful that he does not fall into error and harm people; just as I have many times seen several of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he punctured the arteries in the neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor treating a man's hernia stone, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui traït une piere de coliche d’une femme et li estraignia les intestins et la vessie, et le fust mors en  .iiij. jors.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treated by a doctor from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant doctors tightened the fracture on top of the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave any padding on the wound, and left it with a lump; and they ordered him not to move it. And he remained like that until his leg, foot, and toe became swollen and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he immediately felt peace and no more pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption had already set in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another doctor who punctured an abscess that was swollen, and then it became inflamed due to the maliciousness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when a ulcer is free of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in various situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to be careful so that the foolish crowd cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take up your weapons then with caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best path so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grievous illness; and put aside those things which cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galiens says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on yourself a difficult illness unless you are called the foolish miracle."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauteries, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it includes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is appropriate that I describe the nature of each temperament and its harm.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of temperament and harm are the longest subject and most subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about it, and agreed on this: and I am content with their words, for I desire brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, and there are .ij. complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, some people have said that cautery is very helpful; while others say the opposite—that cautery does not help illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say otherwise, that cautery aids hot and dry illnesses in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And nevertheless, let no one meddle in this except those who have tried it and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the timing; we fear not at all the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery with fire gathers up the secrets of cures, and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicines.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines travel from one member to another in this way, and bring about grievous diseases and bad healing; and sometimes they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not harm if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and have placed above the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of its work, describing how it cures diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration. So receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time cauteries should be performed, and chose their days.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmfulness underneath is removed by the aid of cautery; and likewise if the cautery is for necessary pains that are forceful and urgent and cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish believe; for the illness that is healed by cautery does not return; and they say it thus: but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not medicine that moves the complexion, and dry the humors that cause the pain, and are worth more than medicine for their swiftness, and for the virtue of their action and their lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the disease and its location and its strength; and are assembled in it the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true, yet they do not believe that cauterization works after medicine has failed, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they fail, then we apply cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with gold instruments is gentler than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cauterization does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experimented and found that it is true in some people.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately if overheated; and they heat it in fire, and there are many hazards.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use the fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two types made due to a condition called "soda", and due to many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for numerous ailments such as pain in the teeth and throat, and especially for all conditions arising from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar maladies.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient be purged by a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his knees; then place the palm of your hand between his nose and upper lip, between his two eyes; and where your index finger points, there will you apply the cautery, which is called "olive-wood", of which here is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while twisting; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if you can see a small bone; and if you do not, reapply the cautery as I have instructed until you see the bone. Then take a piece of silk, place some soft cotton inside it, moisten with butter, and apply over the spot; let this remain until the scorching is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when an open wound remains uncovered for longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise the use of leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one must let the cautery burn so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then one can heal what has been burned in the bone.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must let the cautery burn so long and press so hard that one reduces the bone as much as a woman's finger, so that the humors may issue forth; then one should leave the wound open for a long time, after which one may heal it and dress it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem good to me in all things, except in some people where there is a way of fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more safe and mild for me, and with this I work together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When a chronic headache comes to the whole head and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, as well as oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we mentioned earlier and it doesn't help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize it with that fire cautery a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and make one cautery in the place where one uses leeches; there is a place for leeches on the head; and lift your hand so that you do not go to the bone: the patient feels much more pain with this cautery than with others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is how to do it:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery on the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies that I have described in the division of diseases have been applied without success: then make cauteries according to two methods, namely with hot water and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot water is that you take an onion, remove the outer skin and coat it with honey twice, then make a poultice of it and apply it to the area where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the onion underneath the skin; and when it has been applied, bind it tightly and leave it for 12 hours; then loosen it and draw it away from the onion, and leave the wound as it is for two or three days; then place a linen cloth soaked in butter over it until suppuration occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed, if you see fit to use any burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is performed as follows: Heat the cautery so that it is red hot.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the form of a cowl with a slight curve, and in the middle there is a small opening; and he places it over the painful area, and holds his hand and slightly turns it so that half the thickness of the skin is burned; and he lifts his hand so that the artery does not burn, which is a bad omen, and blood flows profusely.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterward, put cotton in the wound and leave it for three days; then he puts moistened cotton on the wound until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this wound with the knife-like cautery, do so at the very tip, and be careful not to touch the artery in this wound which is not old.
de emigraine	of wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat wounds as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries we have previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help, then you must heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and draw a line half a finger long over the painful area, and lift your hand once, and press down so that you do not touch the artery and so that the blood does not flow to the bone; and be careful of the mandible so that it does not close when one chews, and the nerve has no effect on the patient, and spasms do not occur; and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, and cutting causes great fear in someone who is unaware and inexperienced; leave the wound open halfway; but I will tell you how to stanch the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain comes from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a «point», of which this is the shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above from the root of the ear where you have marked the site to be cauterized; and there should be .x. points around each ear; then treat the site until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for the torture that comes from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not use cautery on appearances that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from moisture and fluids, and if gargling and purgatives for the head do not work, then you must cauterize the patient in three places: one cautery at the root of the ear, another a little above the temple, and the third where the two lips meet; and apply the cautery to the area that appears healthy, and also cauterize the top of the ear just below the corner of the head, and another cautery on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery tool:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the same as the scalpel we described earlier, but it should be a little more flexible and the blade should be a little thicker; then treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on each horn of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz," as we said before; and do the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach. Treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pills and cleansing powders for the brain; then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply the mustard plaster described in the section on plasters to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending to the neck, with a distance of one finger between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on each horn, and cure him as before. Let the cautery be that which is called "olivare," as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and other matter as we have said before; then raise the patient's head, next cauterize in the head and on each temple, one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, he should be cauterized four times on the spine of the back; then let it be until the heart's heat is felt, then lift your hand; afterward, dress the wound until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olive oil" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except those who are phlegmatic; first, cleanse the brain of hair and other matter as we have said in the section on great and suffering illnesses requiring medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king's head in the middle, and do to him .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is fierce and suffering, make cauteries as I said for paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the illness is in an infant, make for him 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with those cauteries as we have said for paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body is moist from the illness, then give him something to drink by which the brains may be purified, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have treated the head of the sick person; then make a small torque out of linen well made, as a circle, and put it around the head; and the sick person must be cross-bound, and be held tightly on all sides; then bring forward the poultice, and apply moxa made from old sheep's wool; and heat it gently with fire, so that he can bear the heat; then remove the circle from within around the head, and let it cool; and do this for the sick person once a week with good management, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make several small burns all over the cautery instrument. This cautery method cools down the brain quickly; and then put on wet cotton padded with suet and chicken fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye problems first arise from the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to raise his head, and cauterizes the scalp, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the eye is from both eyes together, or one if it is from just one; and covers all the cauteries throughout the veins and arteries that are under the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood issue, stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization: sometimes cauteries or fire are made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where the body weeps
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or within the arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery which I said earlier for the descent of the eye: one cautery in the scalp, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or fires under the two bones; and if there is a need for more, he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	with tears from within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not improve, then give the patient 3 nights of poultices; after that, bleed the head, and cauterize with an olive-sized cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the papery of the eye is softened by sickness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called  "olivare." And here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two warts on the same finger as long as the warts are; and do not leave the hand except that one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pokes the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair in the eye is converted to the parched state, and pokes the eye, and they perform cauteries according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; after that, mark on the paper their shape, which should be like the leaf of the bay tree, and let the beginning of the sign be among the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and mustard seed paste over the eye, then heat the cautery so that its shape is:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing over the shape you marked little by little many times, so that it burns in the right spot; and the sign of the health of the eye is when you see the paper pulled away, and the hairs lifted at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for 3 days; then moisten cotton with butter until the scorch is healed; after that, treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs come back and the paper is softened, then start the cautery over that same spot again, just as you did before; and if the hair falls out, then cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural state, and let the hairs grow back even and not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the shape of the bay leaf; then take French soap and live coals, each a 1/3, and grind them together well; and make it quickly so it does not cool down, then spread it over the shape you made like the bay leaf, and put it over the hairs; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one, and if both, then likewise; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and let the patient's hand be in a healthy state, and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press a little and move it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the bite has passed, lift up the skin, and check if you see the skin raised as it was by the constraining of fire or by incision; and if so, then all is well. If not, apply more medicine to the site where the medicine had not taken effect, until your work is even and your eyes focused; then put on moist cotton in tallow until the wound is healed, after which cleanse the area with an ointment called "diafenes" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes, and if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the area where the skin has softened properly, just as you did before; after which cleanse it until it is healthy; and this is the way to treat an eye infection:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of people are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not rely on the right way for one who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and have an assistant hold his head between their hands so that he does not move or lower his head; then moisten cotton with egg white or pepper juice and place it over the eye; next, heat the cautery which is shaped like a feather quill, with one end pointed and the other blunt; although the blunt one is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat it and dry it out; and if it is closed, open it and draw out any pus towards the bowel; then place a hot cautery on it carefully, and hold your hand on the cautery near the eye socket so that your hand doesn't move foolishly; and apply the cautery to the fat of the eye socket, corrupting it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you reach the bone with the cautery at the beginning, that is good; but if not, then re-apply the cautery again and do so a third time if necessary, then leave it for three days; afterwards place wet cotton soaked in butter over it, and treat it with the drying ointment until it is healed; and if 40 days pass and it is still unhealed, apply an corrosive medicine to the bone until it is exposed; and treat the king according to what ails him.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is one way of cauterizing a fistula that some ancient ones spoke of. Cut towards the fistula and open the area; afterwards place a thin thread of wax in the opening so that it reaches the source of the pain:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the size of a bean; and hold your hand on the thread firmly so that the patient does not move at all, so that the molten wax does not enter their eye; and one should place wet cotton soaked in vinegar or oil over the eye, the wax will reach the source of the fistula, and heal it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, that is good. If not, then one must apply a wound to the nail, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nail according to what is proper in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," and especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you heal these cracks as we have said in the sections, and the cure does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And he applies heat to these cracks until they come to a head; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess occurs in the root of the throat, or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, and it causes a pustule and rot and becomes a fistula, and you treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, but it does not heal: then you must use cauterization according to the size of the fistula. After cauterizing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand steady so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it and affects the area underneath; do this once or twice, after treating the wound as we have described in the section on cures, until it is healed. If it is healed by this method, well and good; but if not, then you must expose the site and remove any decayed bone, according to what you find in the affected area.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the sick person in your mouth; after, heat the cautery which the form of the tooth will come next in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after, lift your hand and reapply the cautery according to your will; after, fill the mouth of the patient with warm salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth which was moving is now stabilized, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and treatment with medicine does not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter is such that you press butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or bronze; afterwards take cotton and wrap it over the tip of a needle, and moisten it in butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the butter moistens the wool and cotton, and apply it to the aching tooth, and place hot iron over it until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Fire cautery is such that you take a piece of iron or bronze, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the shape will come out, and apply it to the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that very day or the next. And the patient should fill his mouth with cool butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then breathe in the smoke; and this is how the cautery is done:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And you can make the cautery from any part of the body that you wish, according to what you have the ability to do; and this is the shape of the needle:
des scrophules	from scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery iron so that the form of the scrofula appears, and has two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the hot cautery once on the abscess, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then moisten cotton with butter and place it on the burn until the scabs are removed; after that, treat the area with ointments and poultices until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lungs, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with solubilizing medicines; after that, apply cautery to the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way to the throat, but only burn a little bit. Then apply another cautery at the junction between the neck and the head at the top of the spine, using the iron called 'clavicle' as we described earlier; then treat the area as we have already described until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the lungs are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the breast in their usual places; and another cautery between the two breasts; and let the cautery be called 'clavicle' according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, make cauteries on the points all over the cautery that is called 'points', according to the form that was previously described for ear diseases; and let there be thirty points or more equally spaced around. After healing the site as described earlier, perform three cauterizations according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, you do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, stroke the patient on their back and sides; then, gently lift the testicles with the fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery with two fingers until it is hot enough. The shape of this cautery instrument should be as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	then cauterize the testicles until it penetrates to the cost, and the figure of the cautery will be four cauteries; and this is why the cautery with three fingers is made, so that there are six cauteries in total; and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery instrument with three fingers:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, apply the porridge-like cautery with a cloth; then let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, very little happens, so apply cautery on the thick part of the clavicle with a cautery needle, or many cauteries in turns. For the joint is closed and the moisture is removed and the patient healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from roots of aristotle, and in such a way: take a long root of aristotle, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your finger; and moisten it in oil, and press it to the fire, and cauterize .1. cautery between the armpit and the collarbone, and .2. small cauteries a little lower down on the side that is under the beard; and .2. cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining slightly backward; and 1. cautery in the groin, and 1. another one over the stomach, and 1. between the two shoulders, and 2. at the sides of the groin, avoiding the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it smoothly as if applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancients say that a man should use a cautery of fire like a razor, heat it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and often without pain, as we have said in the liver abscess. But in this work there is fear or death to the patient, or a fistula arises which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have described in the sections on cures, and it does not help, then there are three good ways to cauterize:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, cutting according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we described earlier; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, but let the patient lie on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the skin where the pain is, or where the pain comes from the left side, and the elevation should be according to the shape of the body, and the cautery should follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Afterwards, insert the two points into the flame until the skin is pierced on the other side; then pull the cautery towards you, and in this way, there will be four. And if you see fit, cauterize with all three points. Afterwards, when the sore has bled for a long time, and it is better than the other sores mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not good for dropsy, except for the method called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must give him .iiij cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the chest, two on the spine, and one on the buttocks; and the cautery should be close to the chest wall.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterward, let the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the wound after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, thus it will draw out the yellow water, and the cautery should be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two incisions on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg, apply two long cauteries with a scalpel; and leave the cauteries untouched for a long time without dressing until the pus comes out; then dress the other wounds as we have described.
de la menoison	of the moon
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, and the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and very weak, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was described earlier for the stomach cautery, and four small cauteries around the navel, one cautery clavicle below the navel, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the patient suffering from abundant moisture, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cautery is beneficial when there is good circulation.Et si li est trop de moistors, et tu vois li sang en isse par la ventrez, fai l’incision sus la ventrez par le mi-cau, car si li sang est de la ventrez et non de la veine, il ne sera pas mist, et li malaide soit mort.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated by division as we have said, but it is unhelpful, then make cauteries: 3 on the spine of the back, that which is completely cut under the armpit little by little in a triangle shape, and 1 cautery under the arm. 2 fingers;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think his stomach is cold and the food is not digested, and one sees the face swollen, then to the face make 1 large cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and 1 on the liver, and 1 on the spleen with a long cauterizing tool; and leave the cautery in place for a long time. After that, treat the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshy growth called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery, heat it until it looks like a razor, and then place it directly on the shaven skin; hold your hand so that the cautery reaches the vein's opening, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of skin, cauterize each one as we have said; after this, treat the wound with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	from wounds that were not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, as we will describe in its place, then such a disease comes that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a patient has an ulcer that is suppurating and oozing pus and corrupted moisture, you should first examine it thoroughly and determine how deep the ulcer is. Then heat the cautery until it looks like a razor and insert it into the ulcer according to its depth, and repeat this process with the cautery one, two, or three times according to its needs; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and large veins. If the ulcer goes deep into the bladder and intestines, be careful of these areas, and do not apply the cautery directly to bones, and think that it is not sensible. After treating the area until it is healed, if the wound is still oozing pus, know that it is not fully healed; and if the pus is not draining, know that the bone at its base is affected and corrupted. Then proceed as instructed for such cases.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain comes from cold and is accompanied by strong winds, and does not subside in a woman, then you must apply cautery to the kidneys on both sides using the chisel cautery that we mentioned earlier. If we cauterize it in the middle, there will be .iij cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and flaccid due to cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the part above the bladder where the hairs of the pubic region begin, with one cautery on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the nail of a thumb. And you will do one cautery above the back, or two if you see the need; and the cauteries should be chisel-shaped as described earlier.
de la marris	of diseases
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the disease is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms late; and when they come, they feel great pain: then one should make 3 cauteries around the womb, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and 2 cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be on the clavicle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the box of the hip, and due to this they move out of their place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of the departure are hollow, then one should cauterize the patient on the box of the hip with 1 cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the box as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and let the cautery be like those by which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then make three large cauteries from the olive tree, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the sores; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the disease is chronic and resistant to the treatments mentioned earlier, then you must purge the patient of the gross humours with foul-smelling pills or similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After that, apply cautery; and there are two ways of applying cautery: with burning medicines or with fire. Fire cautery has many methods, one of which is to cauterize the hip joint with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, making a deep and large wound, with the space between each cautery the size of a thumb; the cauteries should be made from olive wood. Another method is to make a cautery in the centre of the hip joint, so that there are four cauteries according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, the cautery with the circular cauterizer that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way one proceeds in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, one makes .2 cauterizations where the patient feels the pain, one cauterization where the pain holds, and another cauterization above the ankle joint on the left side a little; and let the cautery be with a knife, burning through the thickness of the skin. And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or more places in the foot or nearby, then cauterize there where they feel the pain .3 or 4 times using the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, make more; and if he feels that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make the cautery with a knife or circularly, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have had cautery performed on the ankle of the foot, and they left it until the leg was completely swollen, and the feet as well, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After that, he died from a rupture in his abdomen.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, do cautery on one and then the other according to this method. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the manner: make a iron rod as thick as a thumb, or a little less, and it should be notched all around with notches spaced out by the amount of a finger joint; and the notches should be on both sides, and they should also be like fingers, and there should be a handle made well. And this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then one should place it on the joint of the ill hip, and turn it onto the healthy side; and the cautery iron should be used once with one cautery rod and left for three days. Then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its sight, and we see few who use it; and yet it is one of the good cauteries, which those who can bear it should use where it is needed.
de la dolor dou dos	of pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes in the back, from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or by similar appearances of cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauterizing except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting, after the patient has been purged with foul pills or similar remedies, that one should make three marked lines on his back where the pain is located, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cauteries should be performed according to the cautery called "the point"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. with the medium cautery needle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a tight back when they wake up, and fear; and you find it in the last vertebrae of the back, and in us it appears on the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see one and see it treated, then cauterize it with a cautery of celery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	The purple cautery colors every part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij or .iij lines apart, and let the points be close to each other. After that, cure the site until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to use cautery on any swelling that is in a nerve ganglion.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are from moistors that are spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra," and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by medicine, then it is cured by cauteries in this way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is a need for you to prick the sole of the foot, do cauterization with the entire cautery that is called "point." And if pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, do cauterization on each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries in each part, with all the olive cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand there longer than until the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, prick around the wrist for 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then prick on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the armpits or shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good treatment for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good treatment for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the root of the ulcer
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the ulcer comes in wounds, and the bowels descend to the testicles and it is new, then when you see him being treated, he should not eat that day; and he should use things that loosen the belly so that the farts descend from his belly; then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpits so that the bowels are repaired, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with ointment underneath the ulcer on the bone of the wrist, and throughout a sign that is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery from which this form comes:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	let it grow until it turns white and falls off. Then reset the bones to their place; and the assistant holds his hand so that they do not move back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put underneath him a cushion and a servant on each thigh, and another one on his feet who holds his hands; then place the cautery on the affected area all over your palm, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you get to the bone; and be careful that the blisters do not pop when you apply the cautery, so that you do not burn him; and take care that through this the patient does not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you should know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are useless. And the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults it should be as big as their size; after three days, treat the area around the cautery with butter until the scorch mark is removed; then treat it with other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well-healed; and his hair should be left to grow for a long time so that the blisters do not pop when he tries to move around.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if a well-made brace is provided for him, and he wears it for another 40 days; and has good rest, so that he does not move too much and takes care to avoid too much drinking, eating, and loud laughing; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment for dislocating his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of the bowels
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ulcers come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they are not growing any more, then do .j cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients say that one should cauterize it with a four-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first mark the place of entry and draw a line along the width above the ulcer, and another from above, and hold your hand in the middle of the cauterization throughout. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mild.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to a limb from falling or wounding, and the pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help, then it should be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtuosity and location of twisting and of its pain. If it is healed from the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of that one, for such a habit is that it should move in the limb nearest to which it is, so you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Mixing is sometimes helped by cautery with great care, and especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither decreases nor persists, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: one in the middle of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and two on the corners, and one behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand be so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the skin comes out so that the vapors of the thick humors can come out; and cauterize it according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixing is scattered everywhere and it is manifestly losing, then you should cauterize it with those cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery in the navel, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the hip and another one next to it, and two on the shoulders; and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the lower calf bone, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes do a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another one on the stomach bone, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps and benefits; and know that the patient does not feel pain from cauterization as a healthy person would, because their body is already completely corrupt. And cauterization should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, depending on how you find them in the methods of iron tools. After treatment, cleanse the site with wheat flour and honey, and other treatments until it heals.
de enfleure	of swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be slightly warm at the depth of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit point of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; but one should not attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exit points of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of albars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the remedies of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery slightly deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color changed; then cure with flour of beans and lentils, with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almond, of each one part; and mix all together, and tie it with a cloth, and air in the location until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer comes at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery which seems like a circle, all around the cancer. And yet, wise people say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the cancer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have indeed seen this happen sometimes. A more careful thing is to cauterize all around, with the cautery which is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot be cured
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is late to die, either because of the superfluity that it causes, or because of the age of the disease when it is decrepit (that is, very old), and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize him all around with many small cauteries; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see him piercing throughout the cautery, then heat the cautery tool of which this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called  "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them deeply in such a way that the flow of the pus is relieved. After that, dress the wound until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of disease there is which is called "corroding", and it is nothing other than a corruption of the limb, for it corrupts the limbs just as fire does to dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both large and small, according to what is needed in the place where the disease is; then cauterize all over until you reach the whole corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas an ointment with oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure of ointments that generate flesh. And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, that is good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this corruption has sometimes been cured by medicine instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of much greater help, and I have already described the cure for medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	It often happens that on the feet, through deficiency, there arises a disease which in our opinion is called  "clots", and it is a hard lump that breaks the foot. And the cauteries for this disease are according to two methods. That is, cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water. Cautery with fire is that you heat 1 cautery-iron just like a pen, and it is made of good iron to the size that it can touch the nail all over, and that it has thin edges; then put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it as such for 3 days so that it starts to produce pus; then make an ointment of mallows crushed with salt, and leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted by its roots. Then cure the place with ointment generating flesh until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by going through the body, and often occur in hands and feet, then you must administer hot-water cautery; and it is in such a way: take an iron or bronze rod, or a pen of vutul, and place it on the nail and the surrounding skin, that is to say, warts; and place the rod so that it covers the entire area, then apply a little warm water, and hold your hand steady, and press your hand as you turn it so that the edge of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and thus find the hot water deeply penetrates to the root; and let the patient endure the bite of the hot water for a while; then leave it thus, and it will be pulled out by its roots. Thus do one after another, until you draw out all those in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people tremble from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever, or from other causes, then you should do four cauteries, or four on each side of the spine, one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; thus it will cease the trembling, and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	None appear on the body sometimes but foul pustules, which come from great putrid matters. One should first cauterize at the top of each pustule when they appear, using a thin cautery made from myrtle-wood, with its tip taken to the fire, or long aristolochia root, or lenticular cautery. Sometimes one should cauterize them at their appearance according to this manner, and they cannot grow further from where they came, but the superfluities from which they come are disrupted, and they are healed; however, one must do this after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great discharges of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to someone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein and squeeze it hard until the blood is calmed under your finger and no drops come out; then put in the fire olive-wood cauteries, both small and large, as many as are needed, until they are all red; then take .i., either a large or small one according to the wound and where the artery is running, and put the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold it there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger off the wound, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this with one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well-stopped immediately if the artery is large, except by one of four methods which we have described: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies a tight binding with bandages or placing hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not help then it is no good.Et quant li sans decourt d’une artere qui est petite, et que ne pooit mie estre restenchiee de nule maniere qui nos avons dit, si covient que l’on le fie par medicines qui ont pooir de restenchir; et si le sans decourt d’une artere grasse, si doit il estre restenchiz par liement ou par cautere.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any mirth or present medicine, then one should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly press until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein; and one should not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and swelled and constricted; and make inquiries beforehand about what they need in terms of cautery and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds:
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease that requires cauterization by fire, or burning medicine, and the poultices, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have covered that chapter from head to foot, and I will continue on the same path in this chapter so that one can more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore one must be more cautious. Car li perils et li paors que on encuntre por les tailles de s’estomache, et les maux que il en advient, si com est la piere, et l’estracions d’elle, et les saings et les maux qu’on encuntre, et les estrumens qui conviennent, et les cauteres.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to be foolish. Because people come to cures in many ways. Some are so worn down by their illness that they would recover quickly if it weren't for the delusions they experience because of their sickness, and the severity of their wickedness; and one must fear these types.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these are those who recover their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is stubborn. You should not consent to those who come to you with such behavior, but place more importance on your honor than on your desires. Act wisely and cautiously in what you know and can prove, and use prophecy and indication in treating your illnesses, for salvation is turned towards these. And this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may Our Lord give you wisdom and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy breath from his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what it is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children when they are born, and when the head is squeezed too hard during childbirth; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all those that I have seen, death has followed; and because of this, it seems better to me to leave the treatment out of such cases.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his skull grew larger every day until he could no longer support it; and he believed that the moisture would kill him, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should split a large opening in the middle of the skull; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the openings of the skull on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it has not closed again: then you should split the skull in three places according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, squeeze out all the moisture. After that, bind the splits with bandages and powder, and apply wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound by tenting and anointing, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry meat from a pot of moisture as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the abscess opens, and the gathering of fluid; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of fluid, and do it according to what you are able; and be careful not to cover the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in their eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut open the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When you see them bending forward, the patient should bend back his head; then rub the area around an artery with a rough cloth until the veins appear, then hold the patient's neck with all your strength using a cloth; then look where the vein is pulsating, and the pulse points are after the ears, and they are barely visible; then sign the pulse points with a cross, then bind both of them with a bandage made from a pointed piece of cloth two parts in width so that the bandage reaches the bone, and this should be done on the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, tie the bandage under the artery and over it, cutting also as two parts across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is bound, then the blood flows upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feel it, then you should measure the amount of space of three inches, then sign inwards and cut to the bone; and what it needs for the blood to flow out is 1/4 cup, and perhaps a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains on the bone no trace of pus, so that no abscesses come from it, then strain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	from grain
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old grain comes, and a catarrh occurs, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples, and ancient madness and similar things, and medicine does not help him through various methods of treatment, then we must cut the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is for the patient to pull back the hair from his temples, and feel for the artery which opens in the temple, for it will be evident by its pulse, and is not very deep in some people who are too cold; if it is deep, the patient should stretch his neck backward with a cloth, then rub the area with some coarse cloth, and moisten the area with warm water until the artery becomes visible; then take the spatulum, from which comes the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then pull the skin gently until you reach the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and separate it well from the layers of tissue beneath; if the artery is thin, then pull it to the tip of the nail, then cut it according to the amount of the .ij chiés (a unit of measurement). For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow properly.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the vein, just to three ounces; and if the artery is large, then tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that putrefaction does not come before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow gently; then sop up the excess fluid between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the shoulder is cut through; and this is the main course of treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to finish moistures; therefore it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and places on it tents well made; and when they are taken off, they should be treated with dry medicines that cause charring, and with tents until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as far as you work, you hasten to cover by cauterization, or you employ vitriol and press it to your hand so that the blood is stanched; and if you do not have that at hand, put on the spot ice as long as the blood stops, and moisten the spot with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and then bind it as tightly as is appropriate; and what is better and easier in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutting edge should be well thickened to retain its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the two knives a distance of a thumb's width, and then when you have burned in both places, you must put the hot iron on as far as the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let the two heads be separated because they are not joined by this cautery all over; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears are flowing from the veins that are above the test of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel pulsation in the forehead as if from trembling; and if the eyelids are drooping and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen, and the eyelids are scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it in the past "crushed cure", and it is that you do to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make .3 incisions on the forehead evenly along its length; and let one of the incisions be as two thumbs altogether in front going down to the nose, and the other .2 at the sides above the eyelids, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are at the sides above the eyelids; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .2 mandibles, and let each wound be the length of three thumbs across the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	take a piece of sponge and cloth to wipe the blood away, then fill the syringe with two parts of this mixture:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision on the temple all the way to the second incision; and scrape all of the skin in between the two incisions down to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, then remove this syringe.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	then insert into the first incision the instrument called a «cultellar», which is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, and this is how it is shaped:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the cutting edge towards the armpit and the blunt edge towards the bone, and insert it as far as the middle incision. Then compress all of the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the one that opens from the armpit, and then do the same in the middle incision until it reaches the other one; then draw out the blood evenly, and express the area where the blood was taken; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and moisten it with wine and oil and garlic, and be careful that no pus comes near it; on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer plenty of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has chronic cataracts, and you see their eyes are pale and small, and their vision is weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and hairs grow from them, and in their head there is sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these signs that these substances and this cataract come only from many veins, and the medicine used to treat it is like this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you must command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut through the middle of the forehead, and another from one temple to the other, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which cause movement when eating; and when the bone is exposed, you should suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then remove any damaged tissue between the two lips of the cut, and insert old cotton there, and apply tenting with linen; then bind it up with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, taking care to avoid abscesses; when it is healed, you must rub the bone until new growth begins, then treat it with astringent substances which promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment from it; and administer it to the wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear-ach
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or insects, or minerals like iron, or similar objects. It could also be fluids like water, or garlic and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When a stone or other object that does not adhere to the ear falls into the ear and does not grow in the ear, one should expose the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, apply some violet oil or sisament oil, then extract it with forceps; and cause the person to sneeze with a condiment, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes on, and tie a piece of cloth or wool around the ear; and expose the ear to the sun. Often, this will dislodge the object; and if it does not, one should extract it with fine forceps, for which these are the instructions:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it dislodges with forceps, that is good; if not, then extract it with a fine, small pair of tweezers; and if it does not dislodge thus, make an iron hook and insert the tip into the ear canal firmly, and pack wax around the hook so that air cannot enter with the hook; then pull firmly upwards, for often this will work as we have said. And if it does not dislodge thus, take a leech in which to place some instrument made for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the leech against the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not yield to all the things we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that the abscess drains, and there will be a spasm; and the method of splitting is that you first bleed the patient from the head vein, and draw blood according to its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat where it hangs; and let the split be like a crescent moon as you come to the stone, then press it with all your might, and suck it eagerly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if there are grains inside and it is swollen, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a .i. subtle spatumile according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And administer an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with subtle pincers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the ache that falls into the ear, the patient should use a first-degree nostrum and dry the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on his side where the ache is. If it yields to this, that's good. If not, take many small stones according to your thumb's thickness, and heat them in the fire; then put one end of the stone into the ear, and press the other end with another stone; and do not stop doing this from stone to stone until all the ache comes out, and so it will all come out; and if you see fit, take a reed, and insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in the fire until the reed is burnt; then do the same with another reed until all the ache comes out, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In extracting the object from the body, if it is small like a flea or similar, remove it as we have described in the previous section. However, if the object is large enough to be felt, use tweezers for extraction; this method is the most suitable for objects lodged in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When treating earworms, after you have attempted the methods described in the previous section and in the treatment of distilleries, if the cure is ineffective, examine the ear in sunlight; if you see any worms, remove them with fine tweezers. If none are visible, take a small piece of wool and insert it into the ear canal; this will attract and trap the worms.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow below and wide above. Insert the thinnest end of the cotton into the ear according to the degree of discomfort experienced by the patient; then gently suck on the entire piece of cotton, repeating this process until all the worms emerge. If they refuse to come out, pack the ear with cotton as I have described in the section on stones; if they still do not emerge as described, administer distillations that the ancients have found effective in the removal of worms, and you will find them described in the section on distillations. Distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this device, which is crafted as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with a narrow spout and a wider container for distillation; and for pressing the distillation into the ear, use a well-crafted instrument of brass, or take a razor blade and wrap the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and any other medicines, into the cotton, and insert the cotton into the ear. Next, place the razor blade over all the cotton and gently press your hand to temper the heat so that the medicine is distilled into the ear; the patient will feel it working inside, and the distillation should be moderately warm as it enters the ear, but not too hot so that the medicine loses its effectiveness.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear stoppers
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears, and the same thing happens to adults due to stoppers from a wound or something stuck inside the ear. Sometimes these stoppers push inward and become hidden deep within the ear, and sometimes they cause a slight protrusion that can be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	When the stopper is hidden deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a difficult condition that can lead to various complications. In such cases, one should expose the affected ear to the sun and examine it closely. If you see the membrane bulging outward, then you must treat it in the following manner:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and pointed both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear. If the stopper is made of matter from the body or ear, then use fine pincers to grasp and gently scoop it out until all the matter is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the obstruction is complete in the ear, take a razor that is thin and light, heat it slightly in the fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction which the sick person feels deeply in his hearing, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a plug according to the size of the aperture, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a plug and moisten it in rose water, and powder with vitriol ground; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is fitting that you pull out the plug and replace it with another plug moistened in cerotum made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is relieved; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, soak a sponge and a cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding that are used for treating distempers.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment comes in papers when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are without skin, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cautery, and the cautery after the incision helps; and many times they return, as long as something remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times they come in papers from things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; its work is such: cut first if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is a simple thing to know; then open it with tweezers, and pull off the skin. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not harm the patient; and if the split is large, then tie it up, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will heal it at once and prevent infection.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hives are descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then reverse the paper, and press them with tweezers; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not matter; and when the hives are crushed, wash the area with salted water, and clean the place of that which causes pain until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is woven into papers above, and this happens more to children than to no one, and it hurts a lot in their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten in their eyes; and because of this, they lie on their faces afterwards and sleep on it, and their eyelids are moist, which covers the swelling and appearance with exinach that opens in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head on the healthy person; and then take a .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that exinach contains in each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exinach is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist skin with a spatular blade, and do not make it any larger than the wound that is made in the healthy vein; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take therefore a piece of cloth and fold it between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to press into the fracture so that you do not go all the way to the joint, lest you damage it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the bone does not appear at the beginning of the fracture, then push the fracture slightly open until it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths in vinegar and water, and place on the wound, and apply bandages tightly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it has a feverish abscess, treat with cooling poultices until it is healed. And if there is a hot abscess at the site, treat with cooling ointments until it is healed.Et s’il vient au leu aposteme frouid, si met sus emplaustre chaut, et li apper en la voix de l’esguiselle, si doit aler a l’esguiselle jusques qu’il soit sanez.
des poilz des papieres	And if it has a cold abscess, use a hot poultice, and if there is swelling in the throat, let him go to the doctor until it is healed.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers, different than their natural state, and they are in a disheveled state, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases, like tears, softness of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by an aqueous medicine as mentioned before the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by means of canes, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the paper at the margin where the hairs are growing, and pass a thread through the paper from top to bottom, and turn it over to the razor; then make an incision in the part under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, starting from the great tear duct up to the small one; then remove the thread, place a small tent of cotton and linen underneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure according to the amount you want to raise the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a need to cut out a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper has become, then make an incision along the two lines you marked, starting from the great tear duct up to the small one; and let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair root, then insert the needle into one of the corners of the wound, then cut it all the way around; then bring together the two lips with a suture of a fine woolen thread through an needle, and wipe away the blood, and apply the surplus threads above the two eyelids to any sticky substance; if not, then do not care about it, then leave the suture and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a suture using dry and constricting substances, because the paper will reattach itself to the wound and the suture is useless (as the ancients say), and this procedure is done without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure that is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iij. inches apart according to the shape which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with which to sew it up in the middle of the figure, and another thread through the upper lip, and the second thread through the lower, and bring the threads together evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly and lift off all the skin over which you have signed, as we have recounted, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing it up, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes at your incision, then soothe it with cerote and soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes the paper's hair becomes reversed, so you must use what we have said about the incision; but sewing in one and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of bones is as follows: fold the parchment and cut it according to what I have said, then make two cannulas as long and as wide as the spatumile; and tie two threads at each end where you hold the threads; then assemble them both subtly above what protrudes from the parchment, and extract the two cannulas from the two ends formed; and leave them thus for several days, and the skin which is being extracted will die and harden and slough off as it falls away.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow to heal and the wound still open, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is closed and the parchment lifted, the hairs will no longer grow. This is the form of the two cannulas that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the procedures are such that you thread a fine needle, and insert a fine silk thread through it; then assemble the threads and tie them together tightly, and let the length of the threads be about the length of a palm; then prepare in the spatumile another fine silk thread, and tie the ends of the thread; then place the patient's head in your hand; and keep it exposed to the sun so that the procedure is not hidden, for this is a subtle and delicate procedure; then insert the needle all the way into the parchment close to the root of the hair, and draw out the hair along with the spatumile until it passes through the parchment, and thread the hair into the spatumile, whether there is one, or two, or three, or more hairs; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out through the spatumile and the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the scrotum is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the scrotum underneath to the very end that you have prepared for it, until the scrotum comes out from the opening above and you see it through the eye; then you will treat the scrotum and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany it with a long hair from the horse's mane, and let it grow with that one which you leave, until it lengthens, and then you will pull it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pustule of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called 'alacrati' or the pustule comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to treat the natural pustule that comes from the eye is to split the sudore, and loosen its eyelids, and put in there tents of linen, and ligate it until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than before; but use things that moisten, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altus and seed of flax are cooked, and ointments daquilon melted in one of the oils, and wrap it up with a tent, and treat it so.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the form that it was before; and these works which we have said are not effective remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease, which is properly called "axacrati", has natural and accidental causes. The accident comes from wound, incision, cautery, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle with a double thread and pierce it into the flesh at the corner of the eye, so that the threads come out on both sides, and then the flesh above the needle is cut open, and the cup is spread out by a spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, turn the paper over, and make 2 slits on each side within the paper; and the edges of the 2 slits on either side of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter with the name "J. grische"; then remove the flesh, according to how much it was cut below, from what followed the paper, then join the 2 separated parts, and sew them together with a thread of wool; then treat him with the medicine that softens, and with tents, until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split underneath the hair of the scalp, and according to what is written above; then separate between the two lips of the tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his power so that the shape returns to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Sudden headache
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soudure occurs in many people in such a way that the paper above is soaked with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you should therefore insert the point of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; and use tweezers to hold it, until you pluck out the hairs which are stuck in the spatulum, being careful not to use one that is too sharp or blunt, so that the patient cannot stand the pain of the too-sharp spatulum bleeding the eye; and make your incision, by which you scrape away this blockage, gently, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes in the eye there is a salt water, and it is relieved with sweet water and a compress; then place between the paper and the eye a tent made of linen, and apply to the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day, use the collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is in two ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard scurf; and another that is not nervous but resembles congealed white moisture, which when touched with iron and pinched as if with tweezers, feels nothing. Both kinds begin at the inner corner of the eye, growing little by little until they cover the entire sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient puts his head down, then opens his eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small tweezers and pull it up; then take a needle and thread a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair through it, doubling over the tip of the needle a little and pushing it all the way through the nail, then tie the nail to the thread and lift it up, then scrape the skin along the side of the nail from the cuticle to the quick, and clip the remainder at the root of the tear duct until you reach the thin membrane beneath, applying gentle pressure and leaving the natural membrane over the tear duct untouched so that the incision does not affect the flow of tears; and sometimes only the cuticle is lifted, along with the thread, as we have said. Then scrape it all along the thin membrane underneath:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful not to touch the fleshy membrane and break it, nor pierce the tear duct; and after the incision, apply a little powdered quicklime to the eye, and a bandage made of linen soaked in vinegar, and leave it until the next day; then treat it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook will not go in, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly hooked according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift the nail, and if you see that it is not lessening and the pus is pressing out, then distil from your mouth into the eye an ointment made of litarge and red copper ore, both ground together, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other treatment according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then recommence the treatment as before, until it is healed.Et se li ungles sont lons et i poissent de l’oil, si distille en l’oil coliere fait d’un vairain et de litargire et de sel, et les i estoupe jusc’a qu’ils soient ostes; puis rencomence l’altra ovraige selonc ceste meisme forme.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye with great damage, then stop it up with an ointment, and cut away a part but not all of it so that no tear fluid comes; then distil into the eye red ointment made of litarge.And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the hook will not go in, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly hooked according to this form:
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	In some people a red growth sometimes occurs over the pupil, covering it and pressing down on the eyelids, turning them inside out; it resembles a rosebud. The treatment is to have the patient hold his head steady, then open the eye, and cut away all the growth with scissors at an angle suitable for this purpose, and keep up pressure; next cut away the outer growth, working inward little by little until finished, being careful not to injure the eye during the procedure. The incision should be made as described in the section on incisions for nail growths, using gentle force to remove the growth, just as demonstrated in this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the growth removed, apply egg white mixed with red vitriol and similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and over that place a piece of cotton impregnated with egg white, so as to protect against hot abscess; if nothing remains, and the white eye membrane is exposed, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to the treatment until the eye is healed, and thus do for any similar growths.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should also consider the treatment of weak eyes by natural means, and of accidentally injured eyes by iron working; and do not put your hand to any of these treatments until you see that this member is suffering from that treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they harm the sight and weaken the eye all day. Therefore, first, you must examine the eyes to see if there is anything else wrong with them apart from the stye; then treat it in this way: instruct the patient to tilt his head back, then squeeze the veins gently according to his judgment, and let the openings be subtle twice according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two openings by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then squeeze the veins gently, and draw out the blood an hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulae, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done that, distill into the eye a mixture of green and red to corrupt what is left of the stye.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot extract all of this in one hour, then make a poultice from things that soothe the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the abscess is healed, then start again according to the method described above until it is cured; this is the recipe for the ointment:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicines that produce heat according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there will be a wound in it where you must split open the abscess and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see the corruption and darkness, then remove all of it with an instrument like the one in the current figure; it is called a "rough head" and should be made into a small, pointed tool like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press with your hand a little while until you feel that the corruption has been removed; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the wounds are sewn up and scabs form, and the flesh of the bowels is sewn up, and it remains like this for 40 days, and if it does not heal and there is no sign of improvement, you know that it is healed; if not, then do nothing but pull on the fistula from the opening in the navel according to the following form: and you must uncover the bone a second time with iron and with hot medications, and when it is uncovered take this 3-pointed iron tool, and the staff should be tapered to a point as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone over the ulcer, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then return to pushing the entire tool as far as it can go until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it with every movement, if they hold their hand over their navel; then restore the site with dry medications as I have instructed you, and when the scabs form and harden, they will see that the matter has gone to the navel; this is much easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the opening of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance or thinning of the lens, you should bind the patient's eye; then heal it, then place leeches without burning to suck out the blood, then apply a poultice made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla on top of the eye, and then compress the eye with bandages and cloth; the way of using the cloth is to take soft cloth and double each one in four, then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye needs; then compress it from above with a firm bandage, and start again with the leeches to suck without burning; then remove the leeches and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the bandage becomes soft, you should tighten it; then remove the poultice after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, start again with the poultice and bandages until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in woven fabric, it opens and reveals something like a resin grain, and it is frightening to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread in the armhole; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the area of the double thread and tie one part of the fabric tightly, then pull out the needle and place a soft lining on the eye, and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. Sometimes the wound is restricted by the fabric in a circular pattern around the wound, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes from the bottom of the eye, and corrects the white moisture and lowers the eyes, and enter in as soon as possible; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati", is only in the bow that is assembled in the eye, resembling a descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the treatment is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then hold the head between your hands for a while, and move it so that you see the bow coming up to your eyes; then it should be stopped there, and the light should not descend and be obscured, and the patient should see things as he used to. And if it does not go down under, know that it is water, and if the descent of the bow is not apparent as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sharp spatulum and press on the white part of the eye  a little bit through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the white part and the cornea, until the bow comes out; and when it is issued, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled with honey, then let it be cured with another cure until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have already discussed the appearance of the diseases in their division, and what should be done to pierce them; now we must act according to health. It is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that he does not see the sun, and press his healthy eye very firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument against the crown by the thickness of a hair at that white part of the eye to the smaller tear duct, then suck the instrument called "almagda" gently, and turn your hand so that it pierces the white of the eye, and you will feel that the almagda reaches the hollow; and the measurement of the path of the almagda should reach the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone in this paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, then place the instrument where the aqueous humor is, then express it beneath one pathway after another. If the aqueous humor flows out now, the patient will see the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest, if the aqueous humor rises again through the second pathway, insert the instrument and when it is stuck and no longer rises, gently withdraw the almagda by turning your hand slightly back and forth; then put in a little more rose oil, and remove this eye from inside. Then place on top of the eye a compress of cotton or wool moistened with rose oil and egg white, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, place on top of the eye a poultice of ground eggs with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep, but make .i. slender incision, then pour in alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient .i. dark bed, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. dim place; and he must avoid all movement, and eat light foods, and not move his head or to the right or left, and he should be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind the eye again until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten this, so that the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And if there are hot abscesses, you must untie the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face  .i. eyelid to cover some of the eye, and then he should stay in that dark house again. And then leave the house little by little, and return to his usual activities; and know that no disciples should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, for which they suck out the water, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of alchemy, so that those who do not know them can see them; and they should be of bronze properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads be of the same subtle material, and the rear ones in three angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the character above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Sometimes there are various bumps on the nose; some look like scorpions with feet. And there are some with a blue-colored groove, and some with a light-colored sore. For that which is sore, and not grooved, you must make the patient sit facing the sun; open their nostrils, and spit onto the bumps, and draw them out; then cut what you can sustain with a very sharp, thin knife on one side, as long as you know that the bump is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any part remains that cannot be covered, open it with a subtle, light instrument, so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or abscesses form, then cut it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them until the pus is dried out and all the rotten flesh is removed, then apply ice or cold water and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the ears open and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is rotten flesh in the bone above, so the instruments do not work: therefore you must tie a piece of linen thread, about a finger thick, and twist it between your fingers into a rope, with a space of a finger or less between each twist; and place the end of the thread in the ear to the patient's ability, and draw it through the odorant until it comes out through the mouth; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for whoever wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out through the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth in the other hand, and move them up and down alternately as you are sucking on the thread. Do this until you know that the thread has drawn out the rotten flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the ear as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all the remaining flesh; and then put a plug of cotton in the ear for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them. This is the instrument used to cleanse the head, through which oils and medicines are dropped into the ear.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, similar to a candle, and with a handle; and if you want, make a closed vessel, and fill the instrument to cleanse the head; and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the chest
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called «telul» arises at the top of the head; it grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye. Therefore, you should treat it at the beginning, and remove all the pus; then place the cautery or burning medicine on it. If one delays covering it until it has become large, then take care whether it is hard, a bad color, or insensible: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, and when one opens it, great harm comes to the patient. But if the abscess is from a superficial touch, and not from a deep color, and you see that one can cover it all, then open the patient and treat the area of dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the head is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when the solution of continuation comes in one of these cartilage work-outs, it profits little, except in some men. Therefore, when this happens to someone, look whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the .ij. lips to a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then you should scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then assemble the .ij. lips to a stitch, and tighten them, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and burned incense; and put a piece of strong plaster or other binding plaster over the powders, and leave it until it comes off by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home on the lips there are hard abscesses, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore you should twist the lips, and cut them with a knife on each nodule, and then take them with tweezers and scrape the area after making an incision with ground vitriol, until the blood is stopped; then use vinegar water, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum swelling
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call 'albus'. You should hold it with tweezers, cut it at its root, and let the blood or pus flow; then place powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders, on the spot. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, that is the way to treat it.
des sordens	of the ears, nose, and throat
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	sometimes they are attached to the roots of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, because corruption has reached the gum, and the teeth smell bad; so you should make the patient hold his head in his hands, and press his lips against your finger, and then pull out the teeth or the growths, as far as they will go; and in this way, you should also deal with blackness, yellowness, greenness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned; and if what is pulled out at first comes back, do it again the next day and the third day, until everything is removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to pull them out, according to what the work shows you, so that the forceps used to extract teeth have different forms from those used between the teeth; and these forms, together with others, should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are curing a toothache, it is necessary to wait as long as possible before pulling the tooth, because there is no need to hurry. It is a very delicate matter, and one must not be in a hurry to pull it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Therefore, when the patient is compelled to draw breath, you must be certain about the tooth that hurts. Often, the pain deceives the patient and makes them believe it is in the healthy tooth, and they have the good tooth pulled; and yet the pain does not go away because of this as long as the evil tooth remains, for we have already tried this with these patients. And when you are quite certain about the tooth that hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then move it with your fingers or with a pair of fine tweezers until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers tightly in place. Let the head of the patient be between your knees and held firm so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Then pull out the tooth carefully without breaking it, and if it won't come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side lightly, then move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with cotton, where the rottenness is; then hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break when pulled; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often causes greater pain for the patient due to the root remaining. And beware of doing as ignorant healers do, who, in their haste and arrogance, sometimes break the jaw, without heeding what we have told them; they sometimes bring about serious illness through the holes left by the roots, or by breaking the jaw, as we have often seen. After pulling out the tooth, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the site; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of instruments, by which the teeth are pulled out first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not break when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick material so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made iron, and they should be toothed to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the root of teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains while pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days, until the gums are softened. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which make the shoulder look like a bird's beak; they should be made inside like a file, and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tweezers, then you must uncover the skin all around the root and insert the instrument called "althali", which is a spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root pops out with this, that is good; if not, then use all of the instruments, whose shapes come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one uses this instrument which has .ij. tongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be sturdy enough that it does not break, and know that many dental instruments exist; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master subtlety finds his own instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases for which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it does not break in the bone or in other bones, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, that I have told you, and helps with gestures; here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong enough to hold the bone so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then treat it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is unattractive, especially in virginal women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out; and if it is airy with the tooth, then take this instrument, of which here is the form, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron sharpened at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the gum recedes a little every day because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can be filed, then file it with a file like this is the shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file that needles are made with; and file the tooth a little every day slightly, so that it does not move until it fits; then smooth it at the end with any rasor, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then file the roughness so that it is even and does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the front teeth loosen, either by a blow or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on anything he eats without them coming loose, and you have treated them with binding medicines without success; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and rust, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you wish to direct the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice between two healthy teeth, then put the wire between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you reach the bleeding part; then start again at the point where you began, straining your hand gently so that it does not move. Then cut the wire with pliers and assemble the ends, and tie them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth so that it does not cut the tongue. Then leave it as tightly as possible, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, then tighten it with another wire. It will stay in place and serve its purpose, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the directing of two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is placed back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should meddle with this, and sometimes the shape of a tooth from a cow's bone is made, and it is put in the place where there is a defect, and it is held fast as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the line of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes this line comes from under the tongue, either by nature from birth or by accident from a wound; and the treatment is to open the mouth of the patient, and place his head in your lap, and loosen the tongue; then cover the nervous line from the side, so that the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and it is caused by a wound, insert the nail and cover the line on the side; and be careful that the split is not too deep, because of the artery that lies underneath. And when you have finished, wet the area with rose water or cold water, then place a tent made of linen under the tongue; and tie the patient's mouth every night so that it does not heal. And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol; and if the blood stops, cauterize with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat the wound with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre. And if it is inclining towards blenorrhea, and there is moisture, insert the nail, and open it with a subtle spatumile, and release it from one side and the other; and if the bleeding occurs while you are doing this, apply crushed vitriol until it stops, then return to your treatment until you draw out everything. Then wet the area with rose water and celery water, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	There are sometimes growths in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called tonsils. When you treat them as described in the previous section and they do not heal, be aware: if the abscess is firm and small, with a dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and has a thick root, do not touch it with iron to prevent bleeding; let it bleed until it is dry, then you can pierce it or it will burst on its own. If it is white in color and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for piercing, but first check that the abscess is calm and soothed. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head tilted back, his mouth open, and his tongue pressed down by a servant holding his hands between the patient's jaws; this will expose the tonsil, which resembles a small knife made of silver or brass:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Having pressed the tongue down with this instrument, you will see the tonsil. Take a pair of forceps and grab the abscess, then pull it out from the tonsil, drawing any threads of membrane along with it. Then cover the instrument again to maintain its shape, for it is designed like a hook; the tip curves upward and the ends curve downward, and they are very sharp. It is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use a pair of tweezers that are shaped like it.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And it is sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, then cut the other in the same way, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water, or scoops of pomegranates that have been cooked, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils arise in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was deep in her throat, that is to say, one small abscess; and she had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like that for one or two more days. And the abscess had risen so high that it had pushed out two bumps from the two openings of the nose. I hurried therefore, and inserted an instrument into one opening, then drew out a large amount of pus; then I made another incision in the other opening of the nose, and cleared her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the instrument into the abscess, and cut out a portion, and only a little blood came out; and thus the opening of the throat of the woman was unblocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut the abscess for a long time; and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, so that it became very large; therefore, I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus, it did not grow any more. And I left these parts, and she was to continue the treatment herself.
de l’uve	of the liver
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the eye descends to the socket and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called an "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the wound of the aperture is soothed, and it is thin; and it is round and not long; and it is blood-red, or light brown, or black, then you should avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, in its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it downward, and cut to a depth of one-third or half the length of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting into the two almonds. You should not cut deeper than the natural limit, for if you do, it causes grief in speech and voice. After the incision, use what we said about the incision on the two almonds, and continue the treatment until it is healed. And if the patient fears having their eye cut, then you should use an agent to numb the sensation of pain before cauterizing. The method of cauterization is as follows: the patient places his head on your lap, and you press his tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply quicksilver, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; then use the implement made for this instrument, which has this shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a handle at the top where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon; and you place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye, and the patient lies on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine do not run down into the throat and lungs; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it harden and the burning sensation of the medicine subside. Then take some cotton, wrap it around an instrument, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument wrapped in cotton into the canal above, so that the cotton rests on the eye; do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then let it dry for four or five days. If you need to apply the cautery again, do so, then wash the area around the medicine with cool water, and treat the wound with gargarisms until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus, hyssop, marjoram, rue, chamomile, wormwood, and similar herbs, and mix some of them in a pot with honey, and boil it; the pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and inside the pot there is an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it can be made of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, he begins again frequently, until the eye dries up, and take care that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things happen there; and do not do it except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside it an egg-shell, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; for the egg-shell does not allow the vapor to weigh down the mouth, and it is a good and safe remedy together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a fish bone or spine, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat; so you must draw out what you can see and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can move the object; and if it does not become apparent to you and remains stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches its place, it will catch on, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be bent at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and its tip should be lifted up; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, or it will fold over, nor push the os inside; and move it around so that the patient swallows the instrument, in order that it can dislodge the object; then he swallows it down, or you pull it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the mucus of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Sometimes the mucus is treated with medicine as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient at the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the mucus, then pull it out with a small hook, or with tiny tweezers suitable for this. And if this doesn't work, take a sheep's horn, and put it in the throat of the patient, then heat the tip of the horn, and do this often. And if the patient turns pale all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the mucus feels the water, it will shrink.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not shrink as we have said, then suffocate the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for the fumigation of the larynx; do this many times, because it will certainly work. And the method of the fumigation is to put burning coals in a pot, and cover it with a perforated lid, and place the instrument in the hole; then blow your fumigation into the pot, and have the patient put the tip of the horn in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but reaches the mucus; and the mucus will shrink immediately. And if it does not shrink, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient fast, and eat salty and dry things, and drink no water; and then he will certainly pass it.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to pull out the mucus is, when you can see it, like curved tweezers that can enter the throat; and it has the shape of a bird's beak, and is coated with limestone, so that what it grabs cannot escape; and here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many kinds of abscesses, as the recollections which come to us here and there in this book show, and they differ in penetration and size; and there are two main types, one depending on its appearance, and the other on its location in the body. Thus, an abscess in the head is different from one in the fundament, and a soft-tissue abscess is different from one which occurs in a joint, and each type must be treated differently.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And one must not lance an abscess until the boil is mature according to its nature; and there are some which one must lance when they are crusty, and do not heal by themselves according to their nature, like abscesses which come in joints. For when an abscess comes in a joint, and you leave it as long as it is purulent around the edge, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint will be damaged, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal limb, and you delay lancing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal limb; but if it is near the fundament, one should lance it so that it matures; and one must not lance a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for one which is near the fundament, lest it become impacted within and grow longer, and a fistula develops; and it will not heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one must know the time for lancing an abscess which is mature according to its nature, and that is when the pain has subsided, and there is a reduction in fever, and lessening of pain and redness, and relaxation and softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and one should lance it where it is most dependant, and where there is an opening for pus to escape; and the lancing should be done from the long side of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all places where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, treat according to the affected member. And when an abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave it intact until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it before that, the body from which the venom comes will be elongated, and it will be filled with much filth; and the lips and depths of it may harden. And for some abscesses, one should cut according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. One should treat small abscesses with small openings, and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess. For some abscesses, one should slice off the top and cover it; when it has become like a drape, and is deadened, one should do as one does with blisters. Some are split into three angles, and some are covered like the leaf of a myrtle, like abscesses of the joints. And for some, one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those without a head, such as a superficial abscess, should be pierced directly. And when an abscess is large and has drawn a lot of pus, if you do not draw out all the pus in one hour, but some in one day, then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more; do this repeatedly from great to small, until all the pus comes out. The same is true if the patient is very weak, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an elderly person. For sometimes the pus shoots out with such force that it may kill the patient, and you would not know it. Therefore, be very cautious with this chapter; when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a plain incision, treat it with tents made of linen or old cotton. If it is a large abscess with many openings, put a tent into each one so that they touch each other. If you have sliced off part of the skin and cut around it, fill it with old cotton or raw linen cloth without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, treat it with cold water and ash, and wet a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, administer treatment and care, and the powders that I have described earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the location of the abscess is very nervous, then place wet tents and cloths moistened with warm wine and oil over it; and if it is summer, and the location is fleshy, then place wet cloths moistened with water and oil, or with cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said. Then dislodge the abscess, wash and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.Et se il adonques ne percoit point li pus, et il est gros et froit, si covient que tu traies la bowe derechief tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie; et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure d’oignement ou d’aisil et de viez oile dou frotier, si com il covient.  Et se il adonques percoit point li pus, et il est gros et chaud, si covient que tu traies derechief la bowe en digestion acomplie, et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se il adonques percoit point li pus, et il est petit et froit, si covient que tu traies derechief la bowe en digestion acomplie; et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et se il adonques percoit point li pus, et il est petit et chaud, si covient que tu traies derechief la bowe en digestion acomplie; et li digeresce les sances, et l’essue sus l’eschape; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now we must discuss generally about treating abscesses: I have already told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and now see the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Now let's talk about how to treat abscesses that come from the head; they are similar to those found on chickens, and there are many variations. Some are fatty and have a soft texture like poultry, while others are hard and stony, and there is no cause for concern if the artery doesn't react. The treatment for these varies depending on the individual case. You must use an instrument called an "entromissoire" to examine the content of the abscess; if it contains moisture, you should lance it from the side; otherwise, if it's stony, you should cut it out. After removing the moisture, you should scorch the skin to prevent any remaining moisture from coming back; it will return if you don't do this. Then, apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, or water and salt if the ointment is unavailable, and leave it overnight. The next day, reapply the cotton, and continue doing this until the wound is healed. If the abscess contains a fatty nodule, lance it from the side; squeeze it from all sides and remove the entire core; if the artery reacts, follow the instructions I gave earlier. Treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	The incision on a stony abscess is easier if there is less blood. In some cases, I found abscesses on the heads of elderly women that were like hard, rough, white stones, and couldn't be broken; if one tried to pierce them, it would have caused as much damage as a stone. The openings for these types of abscesses should be made as low as possible so that the pus can drain out; then treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are numerous, and some are joined together. Each scrofula is properly located within its coat, just as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similarities among these scrofulae. There are some which contain moisture, and others that refuse to yield to treatment. If you see one in a good condition for cauterization, and it resembles the color of the body, and is flat on each side and not raised towards the nerves of the neck or the artery or the duct, and is not deep; then you should cover it from above, and cut into each part, and the two lips of the heart are joined together, if you need to, as we have said in the case of abscesses of the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut into the nerve or the vein, and do not allow the spatula to slip and cut, so that the hand does not escape, and do not go too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein and it does not allow you to work, then put vitriol powder or other powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and tie it up; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, until you finish it; then seek out any small scrofulae that remain, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut into that scrofula at its root, but ligate it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it without harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut away the whole scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now so that there is no superfluity remaining due to the size of the scrofula. Then you must attend to covering its root, pulling it outward, and sewing it as we have said. For those scrofulas which hold a superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as that previously described, hanging a tent with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, treat it with an ointment enfolding charcoal until it heals.
de squinance	of squint.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients wrote and spoke of throat-slitting; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the flap of the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", be cut; and one should not make an incision through this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent loss of life due to strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three or four circles, or a small split across the middle, between two circles, or according to the amount of the split in the larynx; not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	And these places are suitable for the split of the epiglottis, that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, then he should stretch the skin of the throat to the very edge, then split the larynx until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the larynx, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the finger that jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the neck, and stitch it up all the way to the cartilage without leaving a gap; then administer remedies that promote healing until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely swollen and the patient is judged to be at death's door and the shortage of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease was passed, and it is passed in 3 or 4 days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, as soon as it was cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young girl take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting some of the vocal cords in her larynx;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it had not flowed out any further than the throat, and the blood vessels were intact.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and healed her so that she recovered.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and had not the lady fainted from the pain, and returned after to her senses;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of yellow, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it has two causes: natural and accidental; where nature has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is in two ways: one similar to a tumor, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear in it, and one should not operate with force except on the small one, and test and examine throughout the entire opening.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as a tumor, and it cannot be moved at all, cut it like one cuts a tumor, and treat it throughout its growth, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and seek treatment immediately, and heal it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of us, all of which I will describe:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now I must tell you about the difference between a wound and an outbreak.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that a discharge is a persistent fever and heat until the boil has burst and completed its course; then the fever and heat will cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With a boil there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a pustule, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And they are according to their appearances, some are greasy, some moist, and their colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of a boil, you must first test and examine it with an instrument called a "probes", according to what its shape indicates in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is to press on the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers, until you know that the instrument has pierced through to the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then withdraw the instrument, and take care that nothing leaks out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the pus runs clear, whatever its colour, they should proceed as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	And if no pus comes out after the instrument is inserted, know that it is a dry abscess, so they should cross it with the instrument and take it with tweezers, and lightly scorch each part, and guard the coat or shirt that the patient wears to make sure it is clean.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out intact, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return to the body many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if some remains and the wound does not trouble you, then treat the wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound tightly, and apply hot poultices to soothe the abscess, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is pulsating, or any other vein that you are hastening, use vitriol and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound suppurates and the bleeding stops; then return to the cupping as before.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the cutting instruments, and they are in 3 ways: large, medium, and small; and there are 4 squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are 3 kinds of ways to use them: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses with fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are also like the needles that they use to sew sorcerers, and they are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are better than those that are blackened with lead for surrounding abscesses with fistulas.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	They are in 3 ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and some warts have two curves in three ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and some warts have three curves and are also in three ways; and some warts have two curves and are only in one way, and some warts have one curve and are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The tips of these which are used for cutting are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except on one side, so that they do not cut the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these introducers are wrapped in pieces of cloth so that the patient does not hurt themselves when opening abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs and arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes another small instrument is made, similar to a piece of wood, according to this form, with which blood is staunched:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes put in the place that heals by copious bleeding of the veins and arteries, and sometimes they are made according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At times, men's breasts swell when they become corrupt, so much so that they look like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	They remain ugly and swollen; anyone who wants to treat them should follow this method from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scorch the fat, and fill the wound with a poultice of warm honey, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags and becomes soft due to its size, as it does in women, then split it into two along a similar line;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	with the larger line containing the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cut the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and use what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely closed because the patient will not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton dipped in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it absorbs the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpit
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpit are like hard scrofula nodules, some of which contain pus and moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been discharged, then fill the wound with clean cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound is deep, then apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of bleeding from an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn shut, there often occur abscesses and swelling of the vein;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows it is caused by the artery, then the abscess will be long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you will sense a pull; and when it is in the vein, there will be a visible pulsation;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is below the armpits and in the groin and neck and many other places, and it is large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid the cure with iron, and if it is on the head, one should also avoid it, and in the one who has swelling of an artery, they should cut through the skin from above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then open the incision with knives, and carefully cut the artery away from the veins, until it is fully exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	take a needle and insert it under the eye, piercing all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread about half an inch, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then probe the area between the two ligatures with an introducer until blood emerges and the abscess is relieved;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that causes bleeding, until the ligature falls off;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is by the size of the vein, then you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess as you can to all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle under the area that you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and thread .i. double thread through it, so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have told you, to one of the two parts with the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will come undone, then tie another needle to all of the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in .iiij. directions;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then lance the abscess so that the pus flows out, then lance the pus from the chest and leave what is attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat the wound with poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As well as abscesses coming in the artery and vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in shoulders and elbows and all joints where there are articulations, and it is a deep abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep within the body, but under the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it is motionless in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or sideways or upward, and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron; for there might be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which is on the head or forehead, treat with a plaster.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then open it with an incision and scrape away at the flesh, then pull out the bone and stitch up the wound until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes they occur in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called 'fungus' due to its resemblance to ears, with fine hair and large lumps; there are both small and very large ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	I saw one man who had two on his stomach that looked more like mushrooms than anything else; there was no difference between them, they were white with thin roots and split open, and moisture flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them open and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces; their appearance in the incision is such that you should examine whether the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a thin root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cut is large, and the patient has a strong pulse, then you must act quickly with the fire cautery, because when cutting there is often excessive bleeding that cannot be stopped until cauterized.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision by the knife, then take a well-prepared thread, tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not stop squeezing the hair Follicle until it pops out of the joint, and squeeze through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, it is afraid to pop them out because of the belly, but you can certainly squeeze out half of them.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and be careful not to squeeze the follicle that is of a pale color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil pops
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in syphilis, and it is on the abdomen and some of the bowels, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned earlier, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the exit of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and it opens with various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it rises, and then returns, and sometimes it is serous, and increases a lot at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict at all; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and it is fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to flatulence, then it is relieved by the touch, and the operations are such that you should look to see if the appearance is due to blood from the artery or vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	You should let it heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bladder, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his abdomen and extend it straight, then sign all around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to sit up quickly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the area you have marked all around the joint.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then cut through the top half of the abscess to the bottom at the large hook;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it tightly with a strong thread, or strong silk cord, and have the patient hold onto it firmly;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then cut through the top half of the abscess extended over the string, and push your index finger in, and grasp the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught in the lining, free it and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find an obstruction, they cut it at the obstacle and cut away the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery or vein causes a blockage, then go around it and return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and pierce the two needles through what you have done in a cross shape.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then squeeze the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see any pus, remove the needles and let it drain until it is clean, and cut away the dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you cut it when it is subtle and delicate, then treat it as appropriate, and lance the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as appropriate and close it up.
dou chancre	from a ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the types of ulcers and how to treat them with medicine, as well as the importance of cauterization with iron. Now, let us speak of the ulceration that occurs in the mouth, and the great caution that must be taken in its treatment. The ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be reached, such as in the breast or armpit, and in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in its early stages. However, once it becomes large and old, one must not touch it, for I have never seen anyone heal from this.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then let him bleed if he has manifest fullness, then open the disease in a suitable place to perform the operation; then cut your fingernails or calluses, and the skin all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and squeeze the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel faint, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of fluid is caused, and the signs of each type, and the treatment using medicine, and that which is treated with iron. Now we will discuss only briefly: and one should not use iron in these two types of dropsy: tympany and hydrops, for they are fatal conditions. So, when treating this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicine, if the treatment doesn't help and the patient is either very weak or has other illnesses besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar conditions, then one should not use iron, as there is a risk of harm. But if the patient is strong and has only dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then one should proceed as follows:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Take the patient's right hand in your hands, and the minister presses the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the thorny spatulas according to this form: And it should be .ij. Parts with a point, and yet not so intruding that it can reach the intestines when it is pushed in, and it cannot bleed;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the hydropsy is directed towards the intestines: you should split under the armpit 3 times on the right side of the chest; and if the hydropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then your split should be on the left side of the chest 3 times; and if it's due to the disease of the lung, then it should be on the right side, and you must not let the patient lie on the split so that the fluids do not flow to that weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and hold your hand on all the spatulas between the skin and the syphac as if you were skinning to the amount of a fingernail or in between; then pierce the syphac until the spatulas reach the desired location, which is where the water is, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which the shape comes: And it is similar to a subtle silver rod, made of lightweight bronze or brass, with 1 small hole on the bottom part; and on one side, there are 3 holes; and 2 on the other, and 1 on the other; and the head is tailored like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes cut the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it will now descend upon the instrument; empty it therefore by half or by a third part, for if you empty more than it is convenient in that hour, by chance the patient may die due to the loss of blood, or he may fall unconscious, or he may approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the ailment indicate, and his pulses; then bring out the instrument and retain the water, and it is now retained by the plug that stops the orifice that is above the syphilis, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this way; then bring out the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient enduring this, and bring out a small amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do this any day, and keep from following until it remains but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a lot of water, then the cure is burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and by dying from drinking; and the cure is desiccative medicines until he is healed, and cauterizing on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. Then one must pierce it immediately with a very fine spatumile according to this form: then put into the opening a very thin plug of lead, and tie it and leave it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the plug and he will urinate, and then put the plug back in; and perhaps one is not needed at all, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose foreskin is tight, if they are treated with a clot of blood, as we have said, will loosen. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are infected, for some are born with the foreskin at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the glans, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, then the tip and glans of the penis are cut to the size of a feather, so that the foreskin splits in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop the blood flow with something that stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times, there are boils on the penis, and it is an ugly skin appearance; and there are both benign and malignant ones; so you must cut them to a depth of one-eighth inch, then scrape and clean all of them, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment over them; then cure with thin ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the ulcer is malignant, with a putrid color and stench, then you must apply cautery to it. When you have burned it, and if the ulcer is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is healed, then cure the one outside. For when you cure them both together, then the head of the penis is not assured from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its shaft and in the scrotum; so you must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate rinds and poppies, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries have two purposes together: that is, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, then you must insert into the shaft of the penis a lead tube, and the patient should urinate through it. And when there is swelling at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, either due to a wound or an abscess, then you must excise it with an instrument until the ligature is released and the head of the penis is freed from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is a painful thing to talk about, then you must excise it with a spatulum at the head of the penis and the skin; then cut quickly between two, and put there a very thin linen cloth soaked in cold water so that it does not swell again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not dislocation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless when we perform this act of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest wound for their safety.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who circumcised around the glans, and with force, and all over the foreskin; so the head would go out because there are two membranes, and by chance one is above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they bandage it, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done from below, the joint of the member is not set right; and in the purification of the nail, perhaps the iron escapes, and they ruin the work, and many times they grow thus so that they do not need purification and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is done with force throughout all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly in a circle all around the tendon; but let the thread be well tied around the skin; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the wand, and then let him pull it in all the ways he can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then hold the wand between your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then press your hand to the wand and breathe on the wound, and draw it upwards until the head of the wand is in; then purify it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wounded area with a double thread, then tie it again at another spot lower down; and hold it with one hand by the second ligature at the wrist and the index finger, and pull the chief of the wand;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	let the blood flow a little at a time, for that is the miasma; and apply powder on top of the powder, on .i. bandage glued with an egg yolk cooked in rose water, confited with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for purification is as follows: the two cheeks should be thin and sharp, and the ears as big as the hands, equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the wound within bleeds; therefore, you must stretch it with your fingernail, so that the pus makes an abscess; and the scabs likewise, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, then let it be until the abscesses are soothed and the scabs lightly peeled; then cut it as much as you can, and be careful of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the site of sudden injuries with a poultice, as we have said in the treatise on poultices, and if it oozes pus excessively, do not wipe it away, but let it flow; then treat it as we have said until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	from retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or a tumor, or a growth, or similar conditions, which we have discussed in the previous chapter.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is blocked, and you see that the obstruction is caused by a stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend over his knees, and place his feet on his back, and stretch his abdomen from above the back, and constrict the area above the navel; this will force the neck of the bladder to express the stone upwards, causing the urine to flow.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be made of thin silver wire, like the feather of a bird; and let the cane be a palm and a half long, and thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way to cause the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the tip a little ball of wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and insert it just to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and let the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil of olive and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the abdomen; then fill the syringe all the way to the bladder, and the patient will feel it go up to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order except that the leader where it goes is wrong; then pull out the thread with the wool, and let the urine flow along the wool, then withdraw it, and let the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or when pus gathers there, and you see water and medicine dripping out, then do this to all of the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is sealed and has 3 openings: 2 on one side and 1 on the other, as you see; and the tube through which the medicine flows must be such that it blocks the penis without any addition, so that one can draw out moisture and push in when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see your medicines dripping into the bladder, put the tip of the syringe into the moisture, and draw as if it were a bowstring; then release the bowstring quickly, and the moisture will enter the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the shape of the subtle catheter by which one cathesizes the bladder: it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	It is made of silver or bronze, and the head is higher up; and below there are two small lips; then take a bladder of a lamb and put in it the moisture with which you intend to cathesize the bladder, then tie the bladder between the two lips formed of a good double thread, and heat the moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the penis, then draw your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered comfortably, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and form it into a circle, then pierce it all around; then thread a strong wire through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put inside what you intend to use of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction along with medications; and I have described the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and on which type of stone one should operate; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as a vein, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it swells; and many of these stones have hard cores; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through an enema, in order to draw out any feces which might be obstructing the intestines and preventing the stone from being passed.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and shake him from side to side, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then make him sit in your lap with his hands under his thighs, so that his bladder is completely tilted downward; then examine and feel around inside him:
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the bladder, then quickly cut into the stone. And if it does not move when touched, then wet your left index finger with oil, if the patient is adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and insert it into its opening, and push against the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it back to the neck of the bladder; then press on it with your finger, and push it out where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and for the patient to extend their testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, following its natural shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And cut between the testicles and anus, not in the middle but along the left side; and let it be straight over the stone, and your fingers pressed against the anus, and let the incision be across, so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance, the pressure on the fingers at the anus may cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there is kind of stone that has angles and edges, and another that is round like a grape, from which the passage is easier.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	For those with angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it won't hold, you must stretch it using pincers which are like a file at the end, to extract the stone so that it doesn't slip out; or insert a very thin instrument underneath the stone; and if you cannot grab it thus, then widen the opening a little, and if the blood flows, stop it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one stone, insert the largest into the neck of the bladder first, then pull it up, and the smaller ones after, if there are several. And if it is very large, you must split it and make a larger incision. For two things can happen to the patient: he may die, or the urine will flow out through the wound where the urethra cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out in pieces with pincers.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have finished, wash the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and tie it up, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then re-bandage the patient over his neck, and do not loosen the bandages until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses and corrosions come in the wound, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is held back by this, which is known in such a way that without a doubt with the urine: therefore press your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains there, then the bladder will be corroded and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist him in every way you know how until he is healed; and it is necessary that every hour that you treat him, that you tie his two thighs, and apply remedies on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and fixed there, and the urine cannot pass; then he is treated in this way, that you cut him many times with this treatment, or one excuses the cutting because of this treatment. I have already proven this.Et li cure qui est plus a grant sallut, si covient le tailler au plus tost que tu puos, car il ne puet demorer, et li urine ne puet issir; et tant qu’il est taille, il est en grant dolor, mais apres qu’il est taillé, il se sent aleseer.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	And the treatment which is more beneficial to health, then one must cut it as soon as possible, for it cannot stay, and the urine cannot pass; and while it is being cut, he feels great pain, but after it is cut, he feels relief.Take a 1-inch iron rod according to this shape with 3 angles fixed in a tongs:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder; then gently push the probe into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and push the probe back into your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then the urine will come out at once, then press your hand on what is left of the stone that is inside the shaft. Then it is broken at once, and flies out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the shaft between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	of stones in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is prohibited by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	The third way is that one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is deeper than that of a man, so it requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear involved.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to, get a female assistant who is very knowledgeable, and gently probe with it, and if you don't find anything, don't worry. Use a very thin probe; and show her a good example of a woman's anatomy, or a woman who knows some of the art, and tell her to do what you instruct from your examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and check very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she should push her finger into her vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and he should instruct her to push her left hand firmly against her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, she should move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder to the root, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where it is most sensitive; and feel the stone in that part; and do not push the finger over or under the stone, and let the incision be small at first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then pour the wine into the wound at the waist, feel the stone and see if it is sharp enough to cut through the wound so that the stone can come out; and know that there are many kinds of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and some with horns. Know their likenesses in order to know how they will come out.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the wine does not work, then apply powdered vitriol and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task and have ready the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the bleeding does not stop and it is an artery that is cut, then apply the powder to the wound and constrict it with bandages and linen, and do not re-open the wound, and leave the stone and do not try to pull it out, for fear of killing the patient; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your task and have the stone extracted.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery hernia is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white pus, which is located below the membrane of the testicles that contains the egg; and it is called 'pus', and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes it to be another egg; and this occurs between the white pus that we mentioned earlier.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the testicles, causing this material to accumulate and spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture takes on many colors: sometimes it is yellow, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and so on.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syphon which we have mentioned, then the abscesses are open, that is, as long as the shape of an egg, and does not show the testicles, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if he has moisture in the scrotum, then the abscesses are open with part of an egg, and because of this they think it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphon, then it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe throughout the entire scrotum, as the form is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this then, what comes after the scrotum, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with fire, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and many layers of cloth are placed underneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left side and instructs the attendant to sit on his right, and extends the arm to one of the two ribs near the heart;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the lit spatule and cut through the skin of the chest between the ribs, all the way to the white skin, cutting it carefully according to his strength;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the plain water through the skin with a large hole, and extract all the water, then put in your fingers, and let the skin rise above; and do not touch the heart of the chest, but only the skin; cut it all around carefully, the costlet of him subtilely, if you do not cut it bleeding well, then the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound jumped out of your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work with the syringe; then bring together the two lips of the wound with a single stitch, and then treat it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut into the vein at the suspension, and extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is divided into two parts, know that these are two branches; so cut into the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash out the blood and place soft lamb's wool in oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and place another piece of soft lamb's wool soaked in wine and oil on the wound, and place it over both parts of the vein, and put over that double folds of cloth, and tie it all together with a ligature in this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with wool according to this appearance, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one of the pieces be tied around the anus up to the back, and the other at the perineum; and the other two ends on the two thighs, and tie all the rest in a knot at the loop of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this ramification of cautery is used in place of an iron incision, and it is necessary to press a thin cautery knife gently against the skin, and heat it as we have said, so that the white membrane containing the water is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce that membrane gently, and burn it with this fine hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have extracted everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the yolk; and know that this method is much safer; and we also warn of bleeding, and of damage from cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing contradicts you, then treat the abscess, or bleeding, or anything else that contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this treatment due to its horrible nature, then administer a puncturing, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that the water is gone,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at the bottom part all the way to the spleen, and insert the puncturing tool deeply into the body; and make the holes wide enough so that all the fluid can flow out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bandage it, and leave it to drain the remaining fluid, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the white membrane does not let the water out at the mouth of the wound, then you should put in it a pipe or instrument with which one treats the water in the hydrops, whose form is described above; and enlarge the wound a little, and let the water come out, and it will be gathered again after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the dissection of this nerve there is fear in many dispositions, because of which I believe it is better to leave it untouched:
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the operation and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the body, and especially in the groin; and this is through a great variety of cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is due to an excess of bitterness and redness caused by a blow, which is spread in the groin, or from a punch;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; and it does not subside, and it is a painful and serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there are dark green and purulent abscesses, with a bluish color, and at times they come from a burst artery, or from inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is due to a vein, it is detected by the hot feeling of an abscess when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	You must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Those who have swelling in their veins are detected by their appearance when pressed with the fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can make an incision on this appearance, and on other similar ones,
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you should cut the heart of the testicles, then the yolk will rise upwards and the white part will be expelled from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the eggs are already cooked with these new eggs, then you must break the egg and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if there is air in the yolk, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension and cut it smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the origin of the yolk is at the back, then you must cut it completely and extract the yolk, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, employ the wound with moist wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to a .i. bud, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient feels great pain when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this illness is just as fearful as the one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And yet we will tell you about its cure according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspension band around his testicles with your hands,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	and tightly twist all the veins that are near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a spatula broadly through the vessels, so that they are exposed.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle where there is .a. double thread, and ties it at the first place where the screw came in, and ties it again at the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he cuts them evenly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with the others or with a bandage, so that no blood vessels are cut that nourish one of the testicles;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for through this there is no harm, and if blood vessels come from all sides, then the testicles should be drawn away from all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment through cutting the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rot of the scrotum
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The causes of this disease are through the cut that comes from syphilis, or the swelling on the belly in the part of the intestines, which cause the intestines to descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this opening is from syphilis or the swelling of it, and these two ways of the flow come from many causes: from a blow, or jumping, or straining, or lifting a heavy load, and by similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs that it is from the swelling of syphilis are that it happens slowly over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because syphilis presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that it is of the section of the syphilis, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear various, under the skin close by, and it is due to the exit of the intestine and the body from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the stones descend with the intestine, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron, there is fear, because of which one should abstain from it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way to do this treatment is to instruct the patient to pull the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if he can reach it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let him be bent forward over his neck between your hands, and press his thighs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then the chest is pressed down and all the skin of the testicles from above is cut away
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert hooks into the loins according to what you need in order to open the wound, and it should be such that the bile can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the scrotum skin that is under the testicle skin, until the white, hard scrotum is uncovered all around.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your index finger in the one that follows the anus, in what is between the white membrane which is under the egg's shell, and between the second membrane
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second membrane; and then move your right hand inside the anus, and hold the white membrane upwards in your left hand, and lift the egg away from all the membrane towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and loosen what is air behind the bowel;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your fingers if there is any intestinal wrapper or hard white membrane, and if you find anything, then put it back into the belly underneath;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	take a needle with .i. large thread made of .x. threads, and insert it into the rear part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then tie the threads that appear, so that there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then tie them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the scrotum, of which we have spoken and is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong ligature of 2 parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the threads around the scrotum and tie them tightly in a figure-eight shape, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, so that no abscess can form there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and cut the ligature according to the first long ligature in 2 parts of that one, and after those 2 ligatures, leave the scrotum which is under the heart of the testicles with the large part of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then the other according to the roundness that the eye carries; then press in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowels, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then apply the ligature that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it happens many times, and they leave the ligature in place until it falls off; and if it takes a long time to fall off, then use warm water, and apply what we have said until it falls off;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done in the same way as the ramifice which is together with the vein, in such a way that you ligature the vessels, after cutting it above gently from below;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then press on it, and open the abscess of whoever is affected, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes there is a rupture in the intestines, as we have said, and the orifice opens; but no intestines protrude through it, and if they do, it is very little, and it can be repaired at any time;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	but if he stays too long in this condition, the hernia grows, until the intestines protrude;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the hernia, as we have said, for it is extended, then it becomes soft and swollen, and the orifice opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you press the site of the fracture gently with the broad end of a spoon according to the quantity of three eggs;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then pull out the pus sac which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible spot of the pus sac;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press deeply into the abdomen, then tie off the two visible spots of the pus sac on the head of the thread, and tie one and then the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull the head of the vein, and do not cover it with syrup or extend the wound or anything else, as I have made you aware in the treatment of a rupture of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it according to the treatment of wounds. And when you bandage the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in bleeding, and cautery is more beneficial and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the testicles inside are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, they must make the patient lie on his back, and cut the softened skin on top of the natural skin; then sew the two lips together with a single stitch, and if you see, close the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it heals, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Do you know that chastisement is prohibited by our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the surgeon knows how to respond when asked, and knows how to treat it; and the other is because we often need to use chastisement on certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, and horses. I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. With the method of attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and dangling; then squeeze them in your hand until they are back in place and you no longer feel them. For the method of cutting: tie the animal down, and cut the skin of the scrotum with your left hand, then cut each testicle open at the middle, once you have well-scalded them; and leave some pus and the thin membrane that covers the vessels; this method of chastisement is better than the one done by attraction, because with attraction, something from the testicles might remain, causing the animal to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	There are two kinds of hermaphrodites: one is male, but between their legs it is open like a woman's vagina, with pubic hair, and sometimes they even ejaculate.  The other is female, with a penis on the scrotum, and both testicles and ovaries.  In the first kind, you treat them like any other wound; in the second kind, those who urinate through the skin of their scrotum cannot be cured.
de la tentigene	of the tetter
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tetter is a skin disease that causes ugly sores on the body; some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. You must cut away the excess skin of the tetter with your hand or fingernails, but not too deeply so that bleeding occurs, and then cure the sore with another sore until it is healed. There is also a sore that arises in the mouth, which looks like a cow's udder, and they call it the "cow disease". You must cut this as you would the tetter, and then cure it once it is healed.
de erratique	of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are opened veins from which blood flows freely, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become thrombosed; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in a previous section. I said that both hemorrhoids and thrombosed hemorrhoids, when they are fully formed inside the anus, and do not respond to treatment with medication, can only be cured by surgery using iron instruments. Those that can be felt at the entrance of the anus can be treated. Therefore, one should place the patient in a cool room, then cut off the hemorrhoids with tweezers, and cauterize their roots with a mixture of powdered astringent medications such as acacia and dragon's blood incense, and similar substances; then bind her feet to the wall for an hour, and then submerge her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, she should sit in a decoction made from sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar substances. Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to her back. If this stops the bleeding, that is good. If not, apply leeches to the back and breasts without using iron instruments; then take wool, soak it in plantain juice or aglet leaf juice mixed with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals. The one called 'albathir' is red and resembles a hard lump, so it should be treated as I have described for thrombosed hemorrhoids; then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	There are many types of abscesses that can form in the anus, including sores, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, as well as several others that I have described in a previous section. Therefore, I will now describe in this treatise the hot abscess that forms in the anus, which is not the same as the one that occurs in the bowels. If you want to know how to use the instrument, examine whether the abscess is suppurating at the beginning of its formation, and if it is accompanied by heat and fever, and if it turns red when you look at it. Then, do not rush to pierce it, but let the pain subside first; then, have the patient sit on a chair with two small seats for leaning, one against the back and one against the legs, and let the buttocks be spread apart, and place the arms under the knees, and tie them securely with a good rope. Then, suck the orifice towards the right side, and insert the instrument used to open the anus, so that you can determine the depth of the anus and ensure that the instrument does not go in too deep and harm the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the anus with cloth so that it is not uncomfortable, and place the tip of the instrument inside, and then draw it out. When the abscess breaks open and the bowels are released, apply moist tents soaked in rose oil or green oil to the wound, pushing the tent into the anus and placing linen soaked in water or malva flowers over the anus and around the perineum. Then treat the wound with ointment for two days, and then raise the anus and the wound using a clyster of water and honey, and then water infused with lily roots and aristolochia. Return to treating the wound with ointment. If the wound has drained inside the anus, refrain from using heat, but treat it as we have described earlier.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of childbirth and its signs; when you see a woman breathing quickly and desiring to smell flowers, then hasten the child's exit; then you can tell that this childbirth follows nature, with the placenta emerging after the child, and the mother's excess fluids are expelled through proper cleansing; anything different is not natural. Sometimes the baby emerges feet first, or emerges from the body, arms, or abdomen, and sometimes it gets twisted onto its neck or other unnatural positions. The midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, aware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you how to assist in all situations.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby emerges head-first through a natural birth canal, and the mother gives birth painfully with weak contractions, then seat her on a stool or have other women support her. Boil a mixture of oil and fenugreek, and then use a small spatula (as described below) to gently apply it:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and split the placenta, and press her fingernails into her until the moisture that is within flows out; and squeeze her belly so that the baby descends, and if it doesn't descend, then cleanse the woman with a poultice of ground fenugreek mixed with sisament oil; then make her sneeze and cough from the spice mixture, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the baby will emerge. And if both hands come out, then gently pull them back in little by little; and if they can't go in, then sit the woman on a chair, and raise her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and lean her forward so she is not bent over; and if the hands still can't go in, and the baby dies, then grasp the hands at the knuckles as described before, and pull out the child, and proceed likewise.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the birth of a child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child is born standing, it should be turned over;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn him slowly and gently until he is straight;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then grab one of his feet and stretch it out slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct it to grab hold, and make it sneeze from its condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then move it little by little, until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of sarsaparilla, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the woman's nature inside and smear this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then let her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's delivery onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this way, he puts his hands on it little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then he is placed on his back, and his legs hang down, and he lies on a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands a little at a time, then press his hands on his belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until she is ready to go down;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not jump, then take his feet and move them in a circular motion, then move his belly upwards, then put your hands in;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the infant gently; and instruct the woman to press down as the infant emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the infant's exit, which should be about one hand wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	One must try to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot, then have the woman stand up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she can't walk, then have her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the medicine that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a seat, then study to bring the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and turn the child according to its natural position, and have her sneeze, and command her to press until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the child's exit onto its neck, and have her hands spread out, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I must twist her hand, then turn it little by little, and hold it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, he puts on the musselage of arnica and oil, as we have said, then he commands that it moves little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and command that she sneezes, and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the afterbirth
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out in this way to all of the afterbirth, then scrape the afterbirth with your fingernail until the moisture is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child lies on its face and on its neck, then the mother will smother it, and the child will die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, so that you have placed him as it should be, and instruct the woman to hold on for a while:
adonques si istra legierement.	then if he is released easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not a strange thing, but it happens seldom.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are a strange thing, and they do not live long if they are few in number.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that when they are multiplied and separated by the placenta, which is attached to the womb,
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue naturally just like one child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they grow quickly, then the treatment as we have said, and let the nurse be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it benefits to health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or more up to 15, and they are all shaped like children according to the measurement of the glorified Sage
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to know all this, because a similar thing might happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	then act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating a woman of a stillborn child or of a pregnancy, as I have said in the previous section, and there is no sign of life, and you are forced to perform an operation with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if you should know whether a woman is of healthy disposition, and does not have an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips tilted down, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and apply the ointment to .10 parts, or she lies in bed so that she is not treated for childbirth;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with mustard seed and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the baby's hands with these oils and musk;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then press them gently, then bring .I. [the instrument] to the place where they are biting, which is suitable for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and be careful that the child is dressed so that it does not descend onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if they bite their fingers in their eyes or in their throat or in their mouth or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the swelling is on the feet, put the instrument or the finger and middle fingers;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he should dye the nail on his right hand, and place the bowstring between the fingers of his left hand, and wind it around his whole hand lightly, and insert the nail into one of the holes we have mentioned, so that it reaches the hollow;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is how the nail should be shaped:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert another nail, or a third one if you need it, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they should be moved evenly from one side to the other, so that the movements come out, and the nails should bite down to hold the movements, just as this shape shows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some remains, then anoint the joint of one of his fingers with oil and push it into that part and pull on the other.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if nothing remains, then move this joint higher up and keep doing this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must wrap it in .a. cloth, as much as possible.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then cupping on the joint of the palm or the wrist, and so you must do with the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is big and it is stuck in the birth canal, or it has an acute pain gathered at the top,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	you must push the thorny spear-like instrument between your fingers, and pierce the head and draw out the pain;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can use the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapters that follow this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so the infant is born with a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pulls out the bones with tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head pops out and is forced, being split, so that the moisture which is in the bottom comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as small as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him so that the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the wound is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the belly or on the foot, then you must stretch it with .a. cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and pierce the belly or foot, so that the moisture that is in it flows out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are paralyzed, and the feet remain,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	then the surgeon should plunge his hand into the wound up to the wound's mouth;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he inserts a hook or two, and pulls it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the wound is narrow due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then one must apply moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the administrator should use poultices, and put on warm, softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can get it to lie down, then administer what we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if the patient is suffering from those abscesses that come in the sea;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and bloodletting comes, then it should be put in restraining water, and other treatments administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman who had had a dead fetus in her womb, then another was sewn over it, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she got an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up so much that it opened and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong吸引 plaster, and out came a bone, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very wonderstruck, for I see that the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	Examine the wound and lay hands on the bones until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and thus the woman lived for a long time, and sometimes a little blood would issue from the wound;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter except that whenever masters find something strange, they should know how to apply a remedy.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the bone back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is weaned; and at .ij. turnings at .ij. heads of .ij. strings.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns are more subtle in the constrictor, and they are made from ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube should be one digit wide, and the rim of the tubes one digit, and long one palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the .ij. edges are two adjustments of this same tube, which are firmly joined in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two settings are inserted into the mouth of the wound to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the appearance of pliers;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has two heads, two settings, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the wound opened to all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging and legs spread,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then tie the two pieces of the instrument together at the bottom, and hold the head of the instrument between his legs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the wound, until the patient does what he wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all decorated and have many similarities; and when the surgeon prepares them, the work is faster and easier for the patient due to their design.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not be discouraged by the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the placenta is retained during childbirth, instruct the patient to hold in her breath and then sneeze it out with force, while you press her hands against her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she vomits, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make an opening in the cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as chamomile, fennel, anise, and marjoram.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All of these herbs, or some of them, are boiled in water over the fire; then place one end of the pot in the mouth of the womb, and the other end in the pot.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the dye until the vapors come within the marble; then make it sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then let the secondine boil gently.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, command the bather to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in the juice of alder, and then wash it off naturally,
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek out the secondine; and when she has found it, she should squeeze it gently and extend it little by little, so that the marble does not crack;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come out and be dislocated.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is narrow, we have described the cure for sneezing, and the fuming of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not one of those that we have mentioned, then beware of pulling;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary for the person at the mouth of the wound to tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse with a four-drug ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if she can, then she will; but even so, when she does, there is a bad smell in the stomach and head, and it hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So, therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman in retention of flowers and secundines, if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is made of glass like a cane, and one puts the small end in the nature, and the wide ends above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and have the fuming done over the coals, and the pestilence until it is wasted, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without their fundaments pierced; instead, they have a thin, subtle membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	therefore, the midwife should pierce that membrane gently with her finger and not with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to break it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on wet linen with wine and oil, then the ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, put a wooden rod in the wound and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to walk around.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this clotting comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a rod of pine.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that come out of the anus or in the space between the two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule becomes old, it opens up and lets out a white moisture or thin pus.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And sometimes these fistulas are piercing; and they are caused by what comes out of the body through flatulence or wind when the patient belches, and sometimes one pops out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach the hip joint and up to the testicles.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows a fistula is piercing at the anus, and not piercing:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you should push your index finger or a needle into the anus, and push a thin needle made of bronze or iron into the fistula when it is not tortuous.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it is tortuous, then push in a tent made of thin splint, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or windiness, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	So that it does not pierce through, then hasten to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or urinary tract, and the urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it has pierced all the way to the hip joint, then the tent will be inserted all the way in;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is twisting and pain in the area around it, then it will be removed, and medicines or salves will not help.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and for these persian ulcers there is no cure other than hard work and the vanity of foolish physicians who meddle in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	For that which is not persian and not old, there is hope of healing through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	And the patient lies on his back, and lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs tilted towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the pain is felt around the anus, you should insert your index finger
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and once it has pierced the membrane, and you feel an opening between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	one cannot work on it without causing harm.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can still heal some, but this rarely happens;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and one helps it by heating the thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and insert it into the fistula all the way to the bottom, and do this 2 or 3 times, until you know that the false growths, which look like an owl feather, are burned;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat it with moist bandages dipped in butter, until the growths come out, and then treat it with ointment that softens and heals.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If he is healthy, that's good. If not, it cannot be otherwise healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it enters the tent and does not penetrate to the bottom which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering of the heart;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if he cuts at the beginning of the fistula, and then fills it with clay before the tent, and then cauterizes afterwards, until he reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered, and will fall; then he should cauterize those false flesh-like things that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus flows, and cuts between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cautery brings together two things: the burning of these charred spots, and the stopping of blood and the drying out of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	Then treat tents that are wet with butter or crushed substance until the places ooze, and let the fires burn in the affected areas.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then treat the wound of swollen, tough, hard pimples with dry remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the fundament, and is distant from the body, put your finger in the fundament, and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between the two is the membrane or the syphilis, or it is about to pierce, then do not use force but rather have faith and hope through one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, lest you cut the tenement that holds the fundament, and let the evacuations come out through there as well.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that cover and clean it after it has been cut away from the foundation, or by tent or other pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then mend that broken bone in the wound as best you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then work to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part above the foundation: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes there are fistulas in this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side near the foundation below the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he inserts a twisted thread into the tent, and inserts the tent into the fistula all the way to the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it pierces through the margin near the foundation inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, as you would put your finger into the foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head out with thread, and bring the two heads together, and hold them tightly for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes, as long as the threads draw close to each other, and stick;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then have it drained in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not advisable to bandage it so tightly during the bleeding, and then during the treatment, as we have said, until he is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny sputum which they make into a fistula is very sharp on one side and pointed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side it is not, so that one should not bandage it as one should not bandage, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And there can be one or more of them, and some are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture.and those inside ooze blood.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	And they ooze a little water or a little blood, and they are the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you command the patient to stretch themselves out in bed, until the hemorrhoids emerge and the veins are exposed;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in a hurry, seize it with tongs or your fingernail, then pull it out by its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	And if the nails cannot hold it due to moisture, then grab it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel's hair.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	Pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and powder some hot powdered medicine on them, which is in place of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	Or you can cauterize them as stated in the chapter on cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the fundament cannot emerge, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and rough enema to wash away what is in the fundament so that it may emerge clearly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient defecates, and if the thread is drawn out from the fundament, then the cure is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should pull them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If you must administer the suture according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then pull the thread through the top and pierce the needle from another side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too wide; then tighten the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and pull out the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to draw off the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place over the wound a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or with cerate, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let him defecate, and when he has defecated, then cleanse him with ointments and other remedies until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the anus or rectum
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels occurs often in the intestines, due to constipation or when the illness is old and medicine doesn't help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You should cut away at the end of a spatula or your fingernail, scraping off the top layer which doesn't allow moisture through.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then dry it until it is completely dry as it ought to be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if it cannot be dried, then scrape away more aggressively than before until it heals and is completely dry.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A flea is a small creature that creeps under the body and bites deeply;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it bites, and one feels it like a deathly trembling, and it comes over the whole body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a feather of an goose's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put this feather on the vein, so that the purple circle covers the vein all around;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand along the whole feather until you feel all around the vein, and push it in deeply, and squeeze the vein from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this out of a feather of bronze or iron according to this shape, and let it be thin underneath and curved on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so that it can hold the vein, and squeeze it And if you see, cauterize the vein, as it is before in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or of melted copper or small and large stones, depending on the person to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are administered to children and those who are weak and in pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, or the stomach is bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the anus is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly where one puts the medicines is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes;
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and there is one inch between each hole, then insert one strong thread of twisted yarn into each hole, and gather the belly together like a goat's skin;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then catheterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	Let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the catheter with oil or egg white, or similar, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the operator squeezes the bulb with both hands simultaneously until it is empty, then withdraws the catheter and leaves the patient lying on his back.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if the medicine wants to come out, let him hold it as long as he can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is even better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you catheterize him for a flux of the belly, and the medicine rushes out, then he should repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then the enema should be as thin as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the thin enema that causes the skin to stretch:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss the treatments by hand and medicine, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and according to what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or with a spear, staff, arrow, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or they are made according to the places in the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and similar organs;or it is made by fire, or cold, or both, or by wind, or by moisture, or by dryness, or by change of weather, or by change of place, or by change of food and drink.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, since the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you fear a hot abscess quickly: then make the wound bleed from the cephalic vein immediately if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and reduce the patient's consumption of wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, then his diet should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat rich food;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put sore on the wound, if hot abscesses come, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and has not been moved by air, powder that I will describe shortly:
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound has been moved by the heat, put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together with sutures, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can be reached, and holds only by a little, then cut it off; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin,
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as testicles and cooked wheat, also as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find pus in the skin, and it is not close to the bone, then cut out the pus completely, and pour it out, then cure it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely and cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie it off with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: you must apply this powder which will heal as soon as the burn has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way to make the powder is: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and grind them together finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly until it is well healed and joined to the flesh;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bandage it well, leaving it untied if it is swollen; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one should use chalks only when one doesn't have incense or dragon's blood, but only when the wound has healed.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound is not healed, then one should use this powder:
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but place some digestive ointments or barley flour made with water and honey on the wound until it becomes dry.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about head fractures after.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and that of the head, except that the nerves or artery of the neck may be cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but let it be and put nothing on it that would constrict, for it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	And put nothing cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	But the medicine should be warm, like chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in sweet water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other moist stones according to this manner.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut and ligature it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is pregnant and full of bowels, so pierce her at a lower place;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, then ligature it, and let it be, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the carotid, and the conduit is kept, through which the meat goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if it cuts the carotid above the throat, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then strains it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then heals it with purifying poultices until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then it wants;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, draw out all that you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave as they are until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and the dislocation should be readjusted and aligned with its proper position.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wound is fresh, put powder on the powder that I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a spear or knife wound and the wound is deep, then look to see if from the wound wind escapes: know therefore that the wound is deadly;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep but the wound is fresh and bleeding profusely, then do not put on the powder at first, nor ligature it for the blood that escapes profusely,
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and let the patient rest;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3, or 4, or more days;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there comes no cramp, nor trembling of the heart, nor twitching of the eyes;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good healing, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and there is an abscess, then you know that there is a fistula; so treat it as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then treat it as one who is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has torn fragments, then treat the wound, and pull out the foreign objects if they are loose.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loose, let the wound fester so that the extractions can be relieved.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from a rupture in the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, by which the intestines are introduced;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the smaller wound is worse than the larger one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one puts them back in more easily when they are warm, if they have become cold;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they contract more on their own,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and therefore it is better for the smaller wound to reset the intestine to its place rather than the others. 2
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you should know that there are four types of hernia in the belly:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The first two common ones occur in the abdominal wall,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the suturing of other wounds on the body, and another two proper sutures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and nonetheless they are more suitable with the suturing of the abdomen, and I will describe each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and no intestine protrudes,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and little needs to be done, this is by one of two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	wet a sponge or soft cloth with lukewarm water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you cook in hot water with squinant, cypress, and spike.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and you wash the intestines until they are clean;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this wine is made constricting, and it is better to drink it to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go down, then cook the intestines in water or altus and malvasia,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this the entrance is blocked with very little.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then they make a small wound with the instrument used to cut out hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is bloodletting rather than cutting,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	which one should not cut without great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the tool to split it with:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	it cuts within the curve and out, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if he puts it back according to its natural shape in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, for this is worth it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	you should make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs above his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	place the head and feet higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the .ii. parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	place it so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so one should manage what I say about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, apply what you are experienced with,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have at hand a minister who can stop the bleeding with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of sewing
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you should thread a needle or more, depending on the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave about a thumb's width from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the wound,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is underneath the skin, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the two halves of the skull, and put together the four pieces;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then pull them tightly with a double thread around the needle in two parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble the two halves of the wound smoothly,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave .I. space, and he pushes another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then pull the thread through as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you need of the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well enough:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore they should be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	that they do not cut and open the wound before healing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the tips of the needles so that they do not poke the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and put tents or sheets on the tips of the needles to keep them from moving,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it requires only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the wound together with one needle and a strong, thin thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these four together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then re-insert the needle into the part where you began, in the manner of sewing cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and make the distance between each stitch the thickness of a thumb nail;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch should be seven times the length of the needle;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed a wound that a man had on his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which had been made by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and the intestines protruded well over two palms in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was on his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine to him after it had been outside his body for twenty-four hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	The wound was sewn up and healed within fifteen days, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And those who saw him believed that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I didn't treat it with ointments because I was in a place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and tie it to the end of a thread;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart directly, then insert the needle into the throat or cost where you have blown.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and pierce through from the other side of the part inside just to the skin;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the leather workers do skins,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave one side of the throat once and grab it from the other, so that the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is if it is like how two parts are naturally joined together.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	They apply one end of the thread to one end, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	take a needle and pierce only that spot nearby,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the two jaws of the forceps
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and pierce from the outside to the inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as two jaws of the forceps;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and the other from the outside to the inside, in two other jaws of the forceps that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the usual method of sewing, and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says this, and some people testify to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one should sew the belly with two needles, having thread on each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is in the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	the incision is more difficult than in other places in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if one re-inserts the intestines and sews up the wound; then put on the cauterizing powder mixed with charcoal,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if it burns the meat, put some ointment on it that is at hand until the wound heals over;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tie the thread tightly and sew up the slits, and the mawmet and the apes;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with the others until it is healed;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, apply aged cotton
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For in many simple wounds, you need no other medicine;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary to moisten with a light woolen cloth dipped in warm oil, or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if there is pain or swelling in the bones, and this happens many times,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	treat him with warm rose oil, or olive oil,
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called 'young' cannot heal when it is raw,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the thread is cut from the wound, he puts it back as soon as possible while the intestine is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	if it is old and turned red or black, then you should ligature the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries in it;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligature,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put both shoulders hanging from the part below the wound until relieved for extraction when the stitches are removed, and the wound is closed.
de la routure dou boueil	of the treatment of boils
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are damaged, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	one can repair it in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw a man pierce his belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and was the wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was filled and became a fistula, and from it came the digestion and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to apply poultices until it was healed and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that it had healed, I feared that the patient still had evil in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and it did not harm him, but he remained in good health, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimentalists say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take lamb's testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the scrotum has opened, put it on both lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if he opens his mouth upward;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he strikes him on the head, and it remains so that he cannot release himself,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another tremor after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely seized;
et cout la plaie.	and watch the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If they get stuck in the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the tip of this intestinal thread and make sure it is very dry,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the head of this thread a thin, twisted flax thread
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the needle with the flax thread and sew up the wound; and then dislocate it again in the same place.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing up a hernia is not successful except according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no healing except by subtle means.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that any wound or abscess when it wakes up, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and especially when it is deep and narrow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the green knotting of a hard and white node, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is like a feather on an bird's wing;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it is clear and translucent, and other times opaque;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes small, and other times large enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no scabs;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	this occurs only for one of the eight reasons;
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is, by the littleness of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within it, and upon the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much bowing;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	the bones are porous, and the tissue is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not effective in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a type of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because of the nature of the region, digestion is slow, and health comes late, and it swells by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must tell you about the treatment of a fistula that is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the sinus, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in any of the sides,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the principal organ, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all of these fistulas that are in this way are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you trust its treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you see it, take a tent of copper or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is crooked, then search for a slender, blunt needle
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because the slender one bends around the crook;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot probe it well with needles,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for moisture quickly passes from one hole to another and cleanses.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you should let it bleed until you can tell whether there is bone or nerve, and it is completely healed.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know for sure the location, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the ways I have told you, if the cup according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the foulness and putrefied matter within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat the wound until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is deep in a straight line, you must open it as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I wet the tent with medicine water, and insert it to the head of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply heating ointments to healthy flesh, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve causes you distress in your limbs, as we have said,
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed and there is rot and darkness within it, then cut into it until all the rot is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cleanse it with healing things until it is healed,
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healed, return to the previous steps as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you have not yet reached the spring:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover and desire to reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if this is so, then it is healthy.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way except to let nature take its course;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone that is corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if he pulls with .a. suitable instrument for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, he should pull them all out;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	then grip and hold firm, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something on the wound to encourage pus.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it fester around the bone,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have looser bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you simply treat the corruption until the darkness is completely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great deal of corruption and it reaches to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it needs to be cut away and covered all the way to the corruption, then clean the wound until it is healed over;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man on his leg.
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	so that the matters came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no cause to discharge in order to open;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but their madness made them work so much that they opened the abscesses
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and much matter came out and became a fistula, and many openings appeared from which pus and moisture flowed from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many received treatment for two years, and there was no wise man in medicine
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was called to see him, and saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what runs through the openings of the body to a great extent;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the bodies of young men became red and had a citron-like colour.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent at one of these openings, and then I explored all the openings,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that they connected with each other throughout the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened therefore, and struck one of the holes, so that I uncovered a part of the bone;
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it rotten and pierced through, and the corruption reached up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and believed that there was no other corruption except for that which I took out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then recommenced, and exposed the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the corruption continued in the bone, and removed it, and then took care to close up the site;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not, although I cut around a palm of the bone, and let it drop out completely,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	and then restored it with medicine; and it healed quickly and closed up,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and there is no need to repeat the procedure except for the weakness of the patient who cannot endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and the fear of death I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For there was often bloodletting but he was completely healed
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and grew on the bone a hard lump, and he was in good condition and did not have any discomfort or contrary effect in all places, neither in eating nor moving around.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, then it must be treated in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a string, and tie it around the head of the bone that is exposed,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct someone to pull it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another thicker string made of wool over the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and are drawn up, so that you treat the corrupted flesh underneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the site where you see swelling, so that the swelling does not break the skin;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot brand or a flat object underneath the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must draw out as much of the swelling as one can see and feel, and draw it out again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is broken, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	and discovers all the flesh; then put a hot iron underneath
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then sew from one side of the corruption to the other, and let the sewing be as far from the corruption as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut through the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the dislocation is in the two joints, there is no other cure except to cut;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the dislocation is at the knuckle of the hand or the ankle, it is a very serious matter,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nonetheless you must investigate the dislocation, how it appeared to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to hurt the vein or nerve;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and you will know that the tools and needles for cutting these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the ears.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their thinness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason one must prepare for each type of work its instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and you will know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the manners of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	then prepare the instrument you need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	Shoulders can dislocate due to internal causes or external causes;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have treated this corrosion with remedies, but they are ineffective,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then cover the affected limb up to the site of the corrosion,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes either by death or, more likely, by the defect in the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limb becomes black and appears burnt by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then after darkness comes, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes over the whole body; so you should hurry to cover it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it's from the sting of some venomous beasts, like a scorpion, viper, and similar creatures,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is on the head or face, then cover it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, then grip at the joint so that the cautery does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, then grip at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no use in remedies that do not match its potency;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And do the same when the cautery comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then grip after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, cut off the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it ascends into the leg, cut off at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to cut off the patient's leg;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way of binding the member whether above or below is that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and one assistant stretches one of the ligaments down, and another assistant stretches the other ligament up,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you loosen the flesh which is between the two ligaments by one spatulum wide, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cut or tie off the thread, and place a linen pad on each side so that the thread does not touch the healthy tissue,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring about another injury and abscess in the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if there is bleeding when you operate, cauterize the wound heavily.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bind the injured member with suitable bandages and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to a certain man in his sleep:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he experienced darkness resembling a burn from fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion began in his toe of the foot, until it spread all over the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered the foot and it healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and a long time after, the corrosion returned in his finger of the hand, and he came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I placed things that cause reverberation after cleansing the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cup his hand, but I refused because I had no hope of reverberating the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	because the strength of the man was weak; and he gave up hope altogether and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he put a bandage on his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	I have told you everything for now, in case someone else needs to know more.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy part, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they burst and discharge, and the place remains hollow, just like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is as delicate as a loose napkin
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not extend to the bone or nerve, and such an injury is called "superficial".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called a "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends to the bone, it is called a  "fistula".;
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and cure it by covering all around with a cloth, especially when it is thin like a kerchief.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not fear its destruction.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you are confident that the skin will heal and there is no deep corruption,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Examine if the breasts are swollen, and if the nipples have a foul odor.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take asafotida, oil, and litharge, in equal parts, and mix them together while heating in a vessel over fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine turns red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	take some of this according to your need, and they make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and they use it as an enema for the breast, and constrict the orifice;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for about two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this as often as necessary until the breasts are deflated and the swelling is gone;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes they are cauterized with water from ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and you should crush ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then let it flow, and use it as a clyster, until you know that the wound is clean.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, or the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if he enemas with water and honey, or a little burnt copper.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you can enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey can cleanse and wash away,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and wine makes blood flow;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and are confident that the intestines are clean,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if he enemas with what causes flatulence inside him,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you should apply a diaphoretic ointment, and the poultice with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you can enema with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the section on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the anus is small and the enema cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it a little with an iron tool, and apply a tent of Egyptian ointment
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut it and leave it only as wide as the syringe can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the bleeding orifice is above, then the cup or lower down where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	Because when the bow is fully drawn, no arrow should be loosed.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	arrange it in such a way that the bow points to the lowest position it can reach,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	because when the bow is fully drawn, no arrow should be loosed.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you wish,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	you shall dress it in this way: let the bow run easily downward and leave nothing of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating remedies to place over the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then cut as much of the breast's opening as possible. Make it larger than the first one.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then apply a soft ointment on another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it over the breast's opening to soothe the pain. Do not remove the large cloth for several days at once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	And the one who is on the breast's opening, remove often to remove the pain,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is venom, or pus, or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has extended in such a way, and you see the nature that rises through the aperture of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast milk has dried up, and approaches health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then loosen it in the morning, or noon, and when you loosen the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	change another cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast milk flows for many days, know that the breast will not dry up.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons persist after a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because saints are near. For there are men who slowly heal wounds with ointments, and others who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if food is indigestible and a woman vomits after many days, know that her milk will not dry up;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts are slow to dry up, and are distant, then apply medicines which are moist in substance but dry in effect;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	such as diaphenon ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and that is the best medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and rose wine of equal substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and with the same, you can make cooked honey thickening,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when a definite ointment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them into powder over the honey while it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then they glue a piece of cloth, and apply it to the chest, and sometimes they administer a long aristolache.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of wheat and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them into powder, and put it on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is long, and is not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you know that the corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard parts of the body, or in the soft tissues.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if there is a wound from a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panaritys is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or from the foot, or perhaps it grows in other parts;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is neglected and not treated, an abscess will form;
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they grow and flow pus as far as the root of the nail, and perhaps further;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corrosion goes to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe becomes swollen, and its colour turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	you should cut away all the excess growth under the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to grow out, and bleeds,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must put the thread under the nail so that it does not pierce the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and pull it upwards gently and slowly,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put medicine on the remaining flesh to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the pimples until they heal.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and draw it out, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see the tooth腐, cut it out in one of the gums as previously described,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it heals;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and biting, and it feels great pain, then you must heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail of the little finger slantingly from above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, apply something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	You should treat the hemorrhoids that grow in some people's hands by chance, which are all fleshy,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes fingernails,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some grow at the base of the joint where the finger meets the hand.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	He who is born with a hernia in his navel must not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	And he who is born at the joint of the navel, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is fleshy if it is light, in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; you must keep him covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	For one who is born where the anus should be, you must first cut around the flesh circularly down to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the bone to a suitable depth, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come from birth, or from joining a wound, or from a burn, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	Then you must treat this fracture so that the bones heal according to their natural shape.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	And put between two tents or dampened cloths in rose oil so they do not fuse together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Or you could place between two thin pieces of wood, until the joints are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If this swelling comes to either palm with the fingers, then treat this fracture as it should be done.
Des vils	Of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Wounds are large enveloping openings filled with melancholy superfluities that come from various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in other people.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer an emetic to him occasionally, and then cleanse him with basil water.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with fire is according to two methods: one is that they cut it, and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	Incision is according to this manner: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg from the ailment above the thigh down to the part under the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then open the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a broad incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then squeeze and draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bandage it, and instruct him to drink possets made with black gall;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and resume the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, as is beneficial for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The treatments for this are as follows: shave the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in water, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then cup the vein from above at the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the Achilles tendon, and scorch the vein from both sides, until it appears when you feel it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pierces the vein below, until it is raised from the skin, and then it can be pricked gently,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then scrape the skin above the vein until it bleeds, then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it with the vein, as you did before, and prick it with another needle, as you did before;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut another wound, or several if you need to, then lift it, and cut at the heel of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull and lift until the second wound; then extract it from wound to wound, until it comes out completely, then cut it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a needle with two strong threads,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	then tie it and pull it out, and put it under a thread, then turn your hand from side to side until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be sure it does not pop, for if it pops, one cannot milk or raise it, and the patient will suffer harm.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished milking it, place a compress of wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the wound is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	you must split it tortuously, but do not pop it; and milk it as we have already said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the knife with which one opens the vein is curved, and does not cut unless it opens the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And its handle is thick because if it were slender, it would cut the vein; but it must be thick as we have said, and this is how it should be shaped:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is twisted in legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and sometimes they grow elsewhere than on the legs, and this happens from the porridge that comes under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	like serpents and worms that wriggle between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like a plant root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the wound is open, you must wrap it with a piece of linen from one and a half fingers to two and a half fingers thick, and the knot,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the linen hang loose on the leg, and every time it slips out of place, wrap it around the linen and the knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining part, and do not cover the root at all until it has completely healed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cover it, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus and illness in that spot.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	that it must be treated slowly until it reaches the head, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and sometimes this vein when treated for two or three palmeds long, or ten,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and a man came to me whose vein was ten palms long, and when you cover it, it pierces like a needle and goes all the way through,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; and after emptying the matter inside, apply healing medicine to it for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein bleeds freely, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot, or on the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it flows profusely, and it jumps like a spring; therefore treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called "cow disease" in our land because it often affects cows:
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and there is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, ascending and descending.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it can be felt as it moves from one member to another, until it breaks through the skin where it is going, and jumps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it causes swelling from certain humours, like worms and snakes and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and milked, one cannot help but feel pity when it moos:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	Therefore, you must tie the udder firmly above and below with a strong string,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then milk it from above and pull it hard, and if the milk is mixed with blood in the udder and you do not milk it out,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize it with fire above it as it dies
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, then squeeze under his eyebrow firmly, then pull upwards and out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and one must use a cleansing agent for the body with digestive remedies for putrid humours,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and they are sick from eating poisonous meat.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vomiting" in our language, and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, especially in the chest and abdomen, caused by the movement of wind or air. It can be acute and short-lived or chronic and long-lasting. People may experience symptoms such as belching, flatulence, or regurgitation of food.
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from one member to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	quicker than anything else, just like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left that spot and moved to the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little while later, it ran through the whole body until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how she moved from limb to limb like this; for I had never seen this disease progress in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I had seen many who experienced pain moving from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not want to, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because women have dry skin and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this, the wind is forced out.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it does not appear in those who are healthy, who have moist skin and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	examine above and below carefully, and then press gently until that forced wind leaves its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure for those who draw out winds, as with fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their points is such that there are some with large, small, flat, and twisted points;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some with two angles, and some with tongues, and some with pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and dislocation occurs in any limb in two ways: either in a principal limb it dislocates,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore dislocates in any of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you about later appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must be careful about extracting this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely out, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of a brain injury when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the cerebrospinal fluid leaks out from above the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there is stabbing pain and swelling and redness in the affected area, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and loss of consciousness, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes there is blood coming out of the nose or ears; and sometimes they lose their speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and leaps from the wound moisture white like pus, and also jumps as if from a burn.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if this sign appears to you, then hold back on the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into a hard object, not soft;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the wound also becomes mute like the pulse, and short black blood comes out, and there is coldness and cold sweat, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	you know without a doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that never leaves the lung is foam coming from the mouth, and the throat swollen, and the patient's color changing, and panting heavily and seeking the cool air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the covering of the foot, it is near the small bones; and it causes great pain and great swelling and panting; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance some undigested food may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow pierces the gut, and no feces escape through the bowels, then there is no hope of a cure, nor in extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow pierces the bladder, and urine escapes and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and hip and thigh and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow struck him on the jaw, at the root of his teeth:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and extracted it from beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without a trace.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I extracted an arrow that had struck him in the grease of his eye underneath, underneath the eyelid:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	The arrow was bent back on itself, and he could not touch it except for the tip towards his face,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And it was a great arrow from a Turkish bow, and it went through his ear; the jugular vein was healthy, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he took an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it went through his ear;
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I removed the barb, and pulled gently until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And he took an arrow in his house, which was lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then if he has not passed .xxx days, he will not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and had no bad outcome.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whom an arrow has struck in the back, and the wound is closed over:
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains inside him, and his natural functions do not change,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	he finds no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man who had an arrow wound to the face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he remained like that without great pain; and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And they extracted an arrow from a noble man of the king's household, who had been struck in the eye,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was a little tilted to the right side; and the arrow was fully drawn out
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the wound after she had been bled for three days. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I examined her thoroughly and felt nothing amiss;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she had a pointed pain under her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I placed an attractive and digestive plaster on the spot because the skin was swollen;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the mark of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the plaster more frequently, and the wound healed quickly, and the patient suffered for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he felt the arrow one day within his flesh; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow which protruded at the site;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and transgressed the terms for four months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then he lanced the wound that I had punctured with tongs, and probed it from side to side, but could not extract it;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Therefore I did not cease to use subtle and ingenious tools until the following day, when I took well-made tongs,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what his condition will be by the end of this chapter, until I treated and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot heal:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and sewed up the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I will tell you about the extraction of some arrows:
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you can apply your treatment according to what I say and not according to what the books say, for the books cannot encompass everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters consider very little of what is present and lacking,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	and they do not seek out new works or new tools, or the descents of foreign things which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows grow in the members where they are stuck in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumped out from where it entered, is an arrow entering the flesh, and sometimes jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it doesn't jump out now, leave it until the flesh around it has rotted away and the exit wound has healed;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is lodged in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it for several days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will jump out, and if it doesn't, then pierce around the arrowhead with a thin, sharp tool until the flesh around it is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the skull, and pierces one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents I have mentioned are apparent to the patient: then do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even with the skin after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow pierces the brain, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone and does not pierce the brain,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains for some days without mishap, if the device pulls.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very loose and cannot come out, then administer cauteries around it as I have told you, then cleanse the area once it has healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged deep in the body and cannot be seen, then cut her all over to find it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it out with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut as deeply as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs inside that are holding it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	remove the flesh that is pierced by it up to the depth of 1/7 of a palm as deeply as you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or fold the ears of the arrow so that you can draw it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and skillfully so that you do not break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, then leave it until the surrounding tissue has swollen; then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding makes you feel contrary, then administer what we have said about curing in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of cutting the nerve and of opening a vein, and use whatever means you can to draw out the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and adjust the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow struck.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for that is the best aid there is; and if you cannot, then have him moved according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where some substance leaks out of it, or the skin is swollen where one can see or feel it clearly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut therefore up, as far as the forceps can reach, and then pull it out; if not, jump at once.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, as far as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now, and then try to extract it again until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a piece of arrow in the wound, then remove all of it;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it is cut, and you see to administer a bandage, then he administers .i. instrument with hair,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument; and then tie it off,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is barbed, he ties .i. instrument with a point entering in, for aiding extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits the shoulder, or buttock, or abdomen, or bladder, or ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it, then cut it out;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, then extract the arrow, and then sutured the wound if necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of forceps for treating arrows is similar to an owl's beak; see the shape here:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the tip that grabs the arrowhead is similar to an owl's beak; see the shape here:
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push against the point of the arrow, as shown in this illustration:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pulling and probing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common body vessels
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which one heals are 31, of which there are 16 in the head,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	that is to say: 2 veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "ear-veins";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are visible in the two temples;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are at the corners of the eyes, called 'the eyes' veins';
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein in the middle of the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugulars that are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the .ij. veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and they are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and .ij. veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly used for bleeding are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, which is on the left side of the neck, and common people call it the "neck vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the means is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side of the chest,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the pubic bone,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one they use for bleeding, which clearly opens below the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	The salvatelle is the vein between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second superficial vein, which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The healing of veins which are behind the ears is aided by old catarrh and by migration.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	And the qualities of the healer, as I told you, and it is that you heal the head of the sick person,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then press the sick person's neck with your thumb,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in two spots depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	so place your hand on your hip, and where you feel the pulse underneath your hip, press in.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	take the lancelet, pierce it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upstream.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut through the skin and the vein well. Pierce it through the skin twice, and let the blood flow until you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tie it off and release it, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	I have already spoken of incisions and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The bleeding from the two arteries in the temples is like old bloodletting.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and causes dim vision and habitual weeping, and pain in the body of the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	And the quality of the bleeder is such that I have described.
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse below your finger, and then signs in;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then gently press the vein above your finger with your index finger, and insert the lance below;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and press the vein above, and milk it, as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosen the bandage, and put your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then ligature it firmly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient turns his neck in twisting until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called a "spoon", whose form is thus:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then tie off the vein, and ligate it until it is healed, sometimes with a broad flax thread.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flax threads should not be too thin, and the wound should be stitched across, for the bone is near, and it may break the flax thread when it is fine.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in two eyes helps with their diseases, and with itching, and redness, and in the corner of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and their healing is that the patient turns his neck by twisting a bandage around it, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then he heals it, and the healing is through the mouth, a little way down from the long flame, a little wide, because there is no meat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they will break; then let blood, as much as you need, and then bind it on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is good for a stroke, and for a violent nosebleed, and for facial diseases,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as migraines and redness that come in the face, and especially when they are old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient tilts his head back, then squeezes his nose with his left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and takes a long, thin flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well, and now the blood will begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let it go too deeply, and let the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for one night, because it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The juice of .ij. guindeges helps with the stricture of the gullet, and with the beginning of measles, and with many diseases, and with impetigo, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and with stomachaches;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the healing is such that the patient stretches his neck backwards on both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and the doctor stands over the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein of the long one [finger] widely, then draw out the blood tempered, or as much as is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then treat the other vein in the same way, then loosen the ligature, and constrict the veins gently,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, so that the wound heals.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the bleeding of the lips:
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of the veins in the lips helps with cold in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and splitting of lips, and toothache and earache.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of the bleeding are to have the patient sit before you, and constrict his neck as I have said:
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and you can identify them because they are black, and because around them are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	so grasp one of each, and if you do not know how to identify them and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	take the thickest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same technique.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	On bleeding under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Bleeding the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is good for tightness in the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the bleeding person are such that they should sit in the sun with their hands hanging down, and relax their tongue, and look down each side to see a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then bleed both of them, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	Veins of the neck from which blood is commonly drawn are healed according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by pricking with a very fine needle, or with an olive-shaped one as thin as a hair, and is called «anesil»;
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the needle is very important, and it should be wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins which are smooth and filled with clear blood, and which contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the flame olive:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and delicate, and is for bleeding delicate veins that contain subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The basil vein, which is one of these veins, aids diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the surgeon must bleed it copiously, and cauterize the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he opens the artery, and bleeding ensues, then it must be staunched as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be gripped, but tailed as a horse's tail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if basil does not open clearly, then you must strangle it and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or you want some of his blood, or you heal in his place the vein in the arm: it is revealed clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And the cup to the flame silence, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to find the place of bleeding, then you must also stretch out the arm and feel the pulse until you know the place.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the place with ink, then bind the arm, and cup the vein with the flame silence.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see it pulsing, for that is the artery; avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rising as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then quickly put your finger over it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	bind the arm and leave it thus, and do not move it until it is healed; and be cautious and do not move it until the patient is cured.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the blood is not staunched and it escapes, and you do not have any medicine available, then press on the artery to close it, for that is where the blood comes from; and then staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of bark from an oak tree, cut it in half, and take one half and bind it tightly onto the wound until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then treat it with a styptic powder as we have said.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staunching is not effective in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The bleeding from a vein is helped if it draws blood from the head above and the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	This is because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the bleeder must be careful not to pierce too deep and find the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and if it swells and the patient is distressed, and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument gently; and protect the nerve to the best of your ability.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will cut it longways.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	Healing of the cephalic nerve helps, as it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to heal it by pricking with an olive-branch or myrrh-branch flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must look for the easiest place, and not worry if one fails at first, and one begins again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps the spot swells in some men, when one fails at first, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to preserve health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the wound should be made in one of the three veins: these are the cephalic, fast, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must let blood in the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one must let blood on the first or third day, after two or three hours in the morning.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is administered to the sick has no set time, but whenever there is a need, day or night, at all hours and times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a child beyond the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should those over 60 years old be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be bled in any way, they should first clear the intestines with a gentle enema,
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he holds in much flatulence so that the veins cannot draw from the intestines the harmful excesses that injure the principal limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor is he healed who is swollen with meat, nor who is drunk, so long as he remains in that state, nor the dropsical;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one wishes to heal after colic pain, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with women, and exertion from work, from waking and fasting, and all that comes from the weapon or from the body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly reduce the humors if they are thick, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter the bath, if nothing hurts them, to thin the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal the vein around the navel, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard that day against work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be relaxed and joyful, and the patient should be higher than the person healing them, and rub the arm two or three times,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then loosen the ligature above the wound, for when it is too tight or too loose, it will not heal.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the site with your hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then wet the bandages with the flame of a little oil, then place his finger from his left hand on the wound underneath the site he wants to bleed,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the wound bleeds and does not clot.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins which flow like cords into the body, and some that are filled with winds.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts it over the flame, it draws back from the flame and cannot open the vein; and so it is with some of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein opens, then the wound is too tight, so one must be skillful with these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, then try again a little lower on the leg or arm, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient is afraid, then leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	by chance an abscess will form; do not enter a bath, then start the bleeding again if she wishes;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the orifice is small, cut it short and you doubt that it will not emit as much blood as you wish, then pierce in that very orifice directly with a flame;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work it gently, so that the limb swells; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the place swollen, do not rebandage it but put a little oil there, because it lightens the body of blood, and the oil is changed in that place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And so apply the oil to any bandage you use for opening veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	And it also makes a cautery and a poultice when it is applied to the place; it subtly separates the blood vessels and disperses them when they are too congested.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there is a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not bled before or when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you are in a hurry, place a damp sponge, wetted with water and salt, on the spot for a short time, then bind it tightly for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	You should do this after the blood has stopped flowing from the vein, and if a black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, it will not be harmful.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see any swelling, apply a poultice of aloe or myrrh, mixed with juice of comfrey, plantain, or similar herbs.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and a appearance of swelling at the site of the basilic vein; therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel the area soft to the touch when compressing with your hand, then that swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore be sure not to place anything on the sky that we have said, because it can go without from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each bleeding according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it should be bled little and often, and it must be bled by cutting diagonally, not by pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bleeding is safe from blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than bleeding from a long or deep cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And if the body needs bleeding, one should give damp bread in pomegranate juice; if it is scorched, then bleed three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of a cold complexion, one should eat damp bread dipped in muscatel syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he faints during bleeding, after the loss of much blood, then he should inhale aromatic broth and subtle syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for opening a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to open his arm and bleed again, then when he is weakened by significant bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to open his arm after the first bleeding and he has a strong body, then let him bleed at .VII. hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, they should bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is a great quantity of blood inside the body which has heated up and causes fever; therefore one must draw out a large amount and widen the orifice so that it drains through the palm.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then after you have learned all the methods of bleeding, place your hand on their pulse as they bleed so that death does not come through the palm,
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when the bleeder is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and when you see the arm dislocated, and blood coming out a second time, and the hole is closed, you should not press on it directly;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is crooked, that he extend his arm suddenly, for that would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be until it heals the second time; then you can apply the flame to the tip, as long as the frozen blood at the opening of the vein melts away,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on a little salt mixed with water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be so, and do not constrict it until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed again a second time, then open the vein in the same place, or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arms are bled in the area of the main vein because it is composed of smaller veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to bleed is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the vein becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let it be bound loosely, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now through the middle, not from the side nor from the length;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide, and let it be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot issue from it, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, for it is put in there more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The salve for saving the right hand is good for all illnesses of the liver, and this is how it works:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand outstretched, and pour on warm water until the vein swells, as much as one can see.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	If it is twisted, and you bandage it from all sides, then it will not hurt at all.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	Do not go too deep, because the nerves are completely exposed under the skin,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then applies the hand in hot water if the blood is congealed in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and bandages on the vein to heal quickly, and do likewise for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is good for the disease of the mumps, and do everything just as I told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	Bleeding from the sophtene is good for all diseases that are beneath the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as illnesses of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and illnesses of the stomach, and of the hips and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his healing is such that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the wound until it breaks through.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the wound is at the ankle, and further up the foot there are many blisters;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then heal it on the largest blister, or at the ankle, where it is most convenient to remove.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, then guard against the nerves that are underneath, and heal it across as in chopping; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot issue, then immerse the foot in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the healing fails the first time, then try again a second time higher up, for the site is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do also with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its pulse corresponds to the pain in the hip when there is hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	The qualities of its pulse are such that the patient should enter the bath and twist above the ankle four times in alternating directions.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	However, if it does not open, you should open the vein in any way possible, by pressing and crossing over the vein.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	It is better to press on it, as the location is safe, and it is very effective for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not mend it, then cut a vein on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and watch out for nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let the blood flow until you see it, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Of bleeding with a cupping glass:
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made from horns, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done according to two methods: either by cutting and drawing blood, or without cutting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this farting which is without pain occurs in two ways: either with fire or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and farting that is done by hitting and by bloodletting is done in fourteen places on the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	one of which is at the top of the head, and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others on either side of the neck; and the ventouse under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and leeches on the two shoulders; and leeches on the crouches;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and cupping glasses on the two arms; and cupping glasses on the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and cupping glasses on the two ankles; and in bloodletting, do not draw blood except from small veins that are scattered across the body,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore it weakens one no more than a bleeding vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it must not be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illness it is needed to bleed, or due to habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at all times.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and others who experience fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who spit up a drop of blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who faint, and see nothing but blood and darkness and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is during the full moon, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that come from the eyes, and it must not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this farting if it is in the place of bleeding from the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and those of a cold complexion should not use it, nor those with catarrh, for it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and so the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often bled should become unconscious, and so one should place the leech further down due to the fear of oblivion.Et si li maux sunt de la sainie de la cephalique, si convient mettre la ventouse en leu de la sainie de l’estomac, ou de la sainie du coeur, ou de la sainie des reins, ou de la sainie des poumons.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Ventilation in the neck is located at the junction of the neck and the base of the skull, and for this reason, it is useful for treating constriction of the feet.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	It also helps with fissures in the windpipe, and with hoarseness and swelling;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should not be pushed too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause injury to the throat, stomach, and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventilation at the .ij. ribs in the neck is useful for headaches, and eye pain and inflammation, and strangulation, and toothache.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is in the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it, so that he does not compress the artery, and blood does not flow profusely.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation under the chin is beneficial for diseases of the mouth, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is located in the veins of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation at the armpits is beneficial for diseases that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	Ventilation of the groins is useful for diseases of the groin,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply into the skin, for beneath it are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the back is useful for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath, and it must be large, made of brass, and well-made; and if it is too thin, it may break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal very well, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and are effective for old pains in the joints, and in the hips, and in the bladder, and they relieve swelling; they are located at the .ij. sophenes, and the .ij. ankles, and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping-glass is to place it first empty, and draw gently, and apply it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the part become red and swollen, and the blood appear; then stop, and remove the cups, and take care in dealing with the body, for there are those who have thin skin and large pores: therefore one should only strike once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, one should strike twice: the first time to open the way for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, one should strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we should strike repeatedly; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the termini should be such that the skin is pierced suddenly,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and those with thick and tough skin who have narrow pores should have the locations where the cups will be placed anointed with oil that is both astringent and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is on the head, use violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it's on the body, use watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the person has a gross and cold surplus, take oil of wormwood, or of balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if those whom one heals have tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be applied.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but one should wash it after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture, if they rise from aspen, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or water of honey, or infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and one should not bleed with cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after being bled,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and one should fast when they are to be bled and when they have been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware if the person being bled is choleric and if the blood is too thick and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	then they should eat cool foods such as pomegranates, endive and lettuce with garlic, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and muck, dung from a stable, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those of cold complexions should drink syrup of honey and medium-old fragrant wine, and muck, and dung from a stable, and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give certain people triacle or musk before or after bleeding to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and make the drink subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	Leech cups that are placed without burning are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and on the gout, and on the belly and the bowels and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not tolerate being burned on wounds,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put leeches on the breasts when the nipples are sore; to reduce swelling in a member, as we put leeches on the belly and the bowels to reduce inflammation;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and removes pain when there is inflammation or a stone, and by its attractive power, it removes the inflammation or the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it acts when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only slightly; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a way one fills the cup with warm water, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has a diameter of two inches and a half-palm deep, and on the sides around the middle there is a small hole, as for pushing through an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it should be made of brass, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and in the middle there is a crossbar of brass or iron, for holding a candle,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they are both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the cupping glasses for children are different from those for the old, and for the thin than for the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And so you should put this cupping glass on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or .i. linen, and put it in the middle of the cupping glass, at the end of the tube which is in the cupping glass,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the heat is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the body part, and your fingers should be over the hole that we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapors can go out, and then remove the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the poultice again as before, and repeat it often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, there is no tube or hole, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the body part only when empty;
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not applied except in parts where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on bare flesh, such as ears or nose, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of their use is such that when you find leeches in clean, still water without mud, then they will attach to anything.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and puts them in warm water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then let him be bled and cupped, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply leeches;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are swollen and biting, if there is a place where a cupping glass can be placed, then it should be used, for that is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the affected area, and then apply water, very gently, and then squeeze it out;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the venom bites too near the body, soak .1. linen cloth in cold water, and lay it on top until the bite is stopped;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the bites are multiple, then apply ground glass, or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you can place half-peeled beans on the site and leave them until they turn black, and it will stop immediately;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the fresh blood, or push a needle in so that the leech can suck out the blood,
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are attached, then sprinkle some powder made from aloe and salt, or ashes, and they will let go right away.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish people are speaking about this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, knowledge is strange in our land, for I found no good ones.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing, except through the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have attained wisdom, and through experience and the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and abbreviated it at the end, and clearly demonstrated the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book the sum of its contents and the chapters in which the wise man places his understanding, and dwells upon its truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs in anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient from both sides, as long as nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of the body, or pregnancy, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, namely, cool joints and lamb, and drink no wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill himself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until he has recovered from his illness and returned to his former state of health.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling, or that have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and feet, and cow's stomach, and offal, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with much swelling the fracture is reduced more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones in the elderly and those who are frail cannot heal well or join together according to their natural state due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too thin, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But it matters not, reset the broken bone. Use large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, forcing it into its former position; do not stop there but continue to treat it. And for this, one should eat lots of thick meats as we have said before.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And you should know that fractures can occur in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot, or leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the bone, and another in crushing, like the crack in a quill used for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a complete fracture is a clean break.Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each manner has its own cause, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory comes in its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the fracture of the bone is known by its being twisted and clearly apparent on pressing with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting and no pain on touching, then there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may still have twisting, or splitting, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that come later, and then hold it still very gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that when the fracture goes into a bone, and there are two disjoined parts, they must now be set to an even point so that the abscesses heal;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses come, he should leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are pacified;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it equal to the muscle that you can easily and bleedingly, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it, as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, let it be split into two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member back into its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, you should reset them by all means in their proper places, as much as you can, and be careful that your treatment does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well aligned; then adjust it properly, and do not pull or press too hard, as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their treatment, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is healed, then be very careful with the patient so that he does not move it, whether waking or sleeping, turning or otherwise.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure the member is secure so that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, then it is not healed, and you should put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members such as fingers and toes and the like; so you should wrap them in soft, thin linen.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And for larger ones such as the thigh and leg: you should wrap them in a wide, sturdy bandage, because wide bandages embrace the entire large member and constrict it evenly all around, so that there is no swelling.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then he wraps the wound lightly with 3 or 4 turns of bandage depending on the member, and tightens his hand a little all around the bandage, then goes above the dislocation and tightens it less, so that the dislocation is then moved slightly away from itself.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the bandage little by little until you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another bandage and go around directly above the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the part under the dislocation and tighten it gently, not too strong or too gentle, as we have said in the first bandage above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the bandages of linen or cloth so that they are all even, then tie it all above with a bandage, and then put your splints on well, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something hot to soothe the abscess and reduce the swelling, leaving it for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then, stretch it over your fingers, and let it be half the width of a broad finger or a piece of wood used for making knives, or the width of a palm tree frond, and let it be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But the finger that one places over the dislocation should be slightly larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	And it should be as long as necessary for the limb, either small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten around the splints just as you did at first, then tie a thread over it just as you did at first over the break.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the tighter it is underneath, the less pain there will be; and the thread must be medium-sized, not too thick or too thin, and made of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the threads are thick, as I have seen foolish people make their bandages out of twisted coarse flaxen cords, and this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be more than two fibers' width between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is raw under the splints after the dislocation, then put beneath them flax or lambswool, so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the hernia is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not extract all the broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Because when a limb is large, one should not put splints on it until after 5 or 7 days, or more depending on the heat of the abscess;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and here is the method of ancient splints for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: You should take flour that is ground at the mill and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method of the splint that restores fractures in many ways, especially in women and small children, because it is not too cold or too hot.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones and dislocation and twisting: take 3 parts each of elderberries, ladanums, aniseed and asafoetida, and gum arabic; myrrh and aloes, each 5 parts; alechi 8 parts; grind them into powder and mix with egg white. If the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it restores broken bones until they heal, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster that is good for twisting: take myrrh and viscud, each 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, each 8 parts; açai berry 6 parts; Armenian bole 10 parts, and grind well, and cook in water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of plaster for joints and dislocated bones: take a new lamb's wool, moisten it in lard and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and removing pain. It also smooths out bumps on the bones and reduces swelling.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster out of it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to reduce the swelling of the abscess. Take the root of comfrey, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each one part; and grind, and cook with wine, and if the member is inflamed, cook with coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of plaster that is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take the roots of comfrey, and flax seed, fennel, milk thistle, and blackthorn, and violet flowers and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and cook with salt water or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypochares says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member except to restore it with a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and that it be kept between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.Quant l’homme ou la feme est prestes a la mort, et sent le corps fraich et colde, et ne se remue plus, prene une foye et li foyez les culles, et le cul de la foye metez sus li petiz orifices qui sont en haut li corps, si com est entre li coudes, sus li poilz de la teste, sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres l’ombelice; et les culles li metes sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres li codres.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense, and similar things, as we have said.Quant l’homme ou la feme est prestes a la mort, et sent le corps fraich et colde, et ne se remue plus, prene une foye et li foyez les culles, et le cul de la foye metez sus li petiz orifices qui sont en haut li corps, si com est entre li coudes, sus li poilz de la teste, sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres l’ombelice; et les culles li metes sus li petiz orifices qui sont pres li codres.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and human hair, or bird feathers, and bee's wax, and mix them together, and grind them, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little after, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if so, do not loosen it for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching comes to the area, or discomfort or swelling, then act quickly and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea moss, and dip it in water, and apply it to the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry bed, moistened with water or rose oil, and cover it with a cloth, until you are sure there is no hot abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and relieve the inflammation in the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the gentle massage, and use a little ointment, and do not pull as hard as before; gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you need ointment and bandages, then restart it, just as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing of what we have said happens to the limb, do not remove it for 3, 4, 5, or 7 days; and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and the bone approaches the flesh.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then reduce it more than before, and increase the meat, as I said earlier; and if you see the site drying out more than necessary, know that nutrition cannot reach it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	arise from hot water, every time you release it, and this is each third day, and loosen a little the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	through this work thus the healing reaches the limb, and gradually improves that which the foolish do, who restore the limb crookedly: it is bad, and such work is cowardly, and I see nothing else than weariness and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, with different shapes, and the causes are varied.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for it has fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way to the shoulder blade which is under the bone, as in an axe or pole; and because of this, this type of fracture is called "axe fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "surface fracture"; and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a concussive impact, or a cleaving or collar-bone fracture from stone, or from falling on stone, or other similar injuries.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture which approaches the membrane under the bone, or it is on top of the bone; and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound which is lodged in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason this fracture is called 'capillary'.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling or by similar means, and drives the bone below, and the site is hairy like the blacksmiths when they work on the anvils; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their heads, such as children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these ways of breaking that fine pieces are dislocated as if they were tiles; and I will speak about this later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the distraction over them, and the interrogation under a tent, and through the corruption of the flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is discovered when one uncovers the bone and rubs it, and a black line appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be careful of bad omens from the patient, and if you see any harmful signs, such as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, fever, eyes popping out, or similar signs in various conditions, then they cannot heal without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you don't see any frightening signs and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is winter, you should remove the foreskin before the fourteenth day when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, you should remove the foreskin before the seventh day so that the skin under the foreskin does not rot and the complications we have mentioned arise.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone extends just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you should split the damaged part thus: and you must hold the head of the injured person firmly, and expose the bone in all the ways you can, and as deeply as you can into the wound,
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if bleeding occurs when exposing the bone, or a pus-filled abscess, then assist with whatever is appropriate, and fill the wound with soft rags soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	let the wound rest until the hot abscess is soothed and you are sure there is no bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of operating. The first way is that you cut a close fit in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then [you cut] another slit larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and some wide, and they are pointed and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleeding the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it all around, so that you apply cuts with chisels, not so deep that they go through the bone, and you should have a rim or circle on top, preventing the point from going through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all parts of the head. And this is the shape of the 3 types of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place a probe on the bone and move it with your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then move the probe elsewhere a little later, and do this all around; then cut into the space between the bones with your incision tools as subtly and lightly as you can, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, like tweezers or pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn the bone, it is appropriate that you resect the sharp edge that remains on the bone with any suitable instrument like an incision tool, but it should be more slender and sharper than the other incision tools.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	If anything remains of the small bones or any chips, remove them gently with one of your tools; then treat the wound with tenting and poultices as we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment, which Galen describes and highly recommends, is as follows:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First you must uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you place under it the head of this lens-shaped instrument, which has this shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut on one side, but the part is jagged in .ij. sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit gently with a small mallet, so that you carefully strike the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane underneath it.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, then loosen it gently, because one can loosen it well without harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce all the way to the membrane, and it is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a very subtle rasp; one must have various sizes according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use a large razor at first, then one that is more delicate, and do not stop doing this until it is good.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and shaving techniques, you must adapt to the individual, and this is something that cannot be taught to one who has not devoted themselves to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is exposed, you should place a linen bandage, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it over the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another bandage that is doubled over two or three times, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not put too much pressure on the wound, then apply another ligature above it, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold the wound;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it stay like that for one or two days, until the abscess is soothed, then loosen it and apply remedies such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things. Make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and then apply other remedies without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and ensure that the wound is clean before you leave off the ointment and do not allow any pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the brain's membrane, it hardens and causes great harm to the patient. When one applies something biting to a wound, it bites into the flesh.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackness does not come but because of the medicine one has put on it, that such virtue has, you must take a part of honey and mix with it three parts of rose oil and mix them into a paste, and place it on the wound;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat him with appropriate treatments until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose are broken, one only, for there are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break, but only swells or becomes dislocated, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should put your little finger or a probe into the nose, and push the broken part back into place with your index finger, and hold it there until the nose returns to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the teeth, and the jaw cannot reach its place, then you should put it equal to the head of a rather thick rod.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the fracture is in two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscesses are appeased, then attach to the head of the jaw tenters of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach one to another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tenters be so thick that they fill the holes of the jaw.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some restorer said that one must wet the bandages with butter and change them every day. It seems to me that this is not good, but they should be wet in preparation of egg yolk and mill powder; then leave the bandage, until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers of geese are put in place of bandages, and over this a silk cloth is wound around, and the fracture is bound tightly, and the patient breathes through it; now do as you will.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the ears while you are working there, then put cerate or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a poultice of diaquilone.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if hot abscesses do not come, then put on a warm poultice of flour of sisamen and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put over it light sponges, but do not bandage the ears.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate tools for that purpose, then close the wound and treat it with healing, warming poultices and ointments suitable for that purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with tents and insert splinters of wood until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the dislocation of the jaw:
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated beneath and there is no external wound, and the dislocation is only slight without any fracture, they can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to put your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, put your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and make it even with the other hand by force.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is displaced in [one of two places], then you must administer extension in one part, so that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or splitting, then they must be restrained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put a cerote on the broken jaw, and place upon it a double piece of cloth; and upon the cloth, place a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather of equal length and width according to the jaw, and bind it in place as tightly as you can; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape is changing, then loosen it on the third day, and then put back into place what has changed; and apply a poultice over it, made of powdered millstone with an abundance of egg or flour of salsify, after you have removed the cerote; and upon the poultice, apply a thin layer of lamb's wool, and if the poultices become soiled, and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes for him to recover; many times recovery takes place within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses arise, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, examine whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it subtly with suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, then sew up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to encourage scabs, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceps breaks in several ways in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three patterns: it can be broken and separated into two pieces, which is the easiest to restore; or there can be a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is as follows when the break is without a wound: you need two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder where the forceps are broken, and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then, with your fingers, bring the broken pieces together so that the joint is in the correct position, with no visible gap or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	If you need to extend the joint further, place a round pillow of cloth or fabric under the shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then release the forceps and hold the pillow in your hand, bringing the broken pieces together so that they are aligned correctly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of its socket because it comes in deeply, then the patient should lie on his back, and put one ear to the ground, and the minister should push the shoulder down while lifting the bone of the shoulder.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then you should apply the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken, then you must split it; gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of an overgrowth, then cut it at one of the incisions you have made; but put this instrument under the shoulder to ward off the syphilis:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and is shaped like a spoon, but not flat, and is as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and the extent of the wound; and has two handles, one wide and the other narrow, depending on the shape of the incision you made when you pulled the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the incision is small, or if you doubt the hot abscess, then pack the wound with bandages and tents according to its amount.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are deep abscesses, moisten a cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of a bone, when there is no wound or cut, is to apply the powder of the mill and egg white, and put light dressings on top, and place a splint underneath if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of cloth about the width of a palm, then put a double layer of cloth over the dressings and plaster; next take a thin strip of wood about six inches long and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the strip over the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and adjust it from each end, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture in alignment, and you clearly see that the strip does not move over the broken bone, then release it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	let the patient lie on his back and place a small pillow under his shoulder to raise the shoulder joint; thus the fracture of the collar bone will be relieved by the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it unless some mishap occurs, for up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then start the poultice again if you see that it is needed, and leave it on until it is healed; usually it takes 28 days to heal, but some people recover in less time.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It can happen that the shoulder is broken or displaced, and it does not hurt when touched; then adjust it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can. Then apply powdered flour with egg white, and light gauze, and place it on a double piece of cloth; then place it over a wide and thin stone, which is slightly larger than the shoulder. If there are bumps underneath the stone on the shoulder, then cover those bumps with gauze so that the stone sits evenly. Then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the stone does not move from its position, and check the binding every day; and each time it becomes loose, tighten it again, and adjust the stone if it has moved out of place. Let the patient lie on his side, and the shoulder will be healed in 20 to 25 days. When these number of days are complete, then remove the bandage, and be careful, for it is not a bone that heals easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, they should cut it off, and the bone, and do what we have said about relieving the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	from the break in the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it is more often broken on the top. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the bottom, and the patient feels great pain and loss of strength, and becomes weak all over, and may vomit blood, and the wound opens in the broken bone, which feels very painful.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a pillow between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together and bring the ribs close together with his hands, making sure that the bones are in their proper position; then he should apply plasters and bandages over the broken bone, using salt or some other light material, and wrap it in a cloth, binding it firmly to the bone so that it does not move; then he should bind the linen tightly around the waist, and every hour loosen the binding, and if it softens, tighten it again; and if it needs to be loosed for corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then he should hurry and loosen it, and wash away what has come out from the wound, and dress it according to the various methods of treatment; then re-apply the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures occur only in the large ribs near the back, and in the upper part inside, and they bend only because they are slippery; and one feels it well on examination at both ends.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the treatment is that you put it back in place, as it should be. And then apply the ointment, and hold it steady with a bandage, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is bent inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, for the bone punctures the lining; and he has difficulty breathing, and coughs up a great quantity of blood, and it is a serious illness, and the ancient physicians placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if one has a fracture, they say that one should eat foods that bloat the belly, to force out the broken bone.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make hot poultices unless an abscess is already there.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is there, then we cleanse it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place leeches on the site to draw out pus, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the leech will attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the place with soft wool soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the area around even, then it should be bandaged with a bandage of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone pointing through the bandage, and there is doubt about the patient, then one should split above the site of the broken rib, and place an instrument underneath to ward off the infection; and then one should cut the bone and gently pull, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and bandage it with poultices until it heals. And if hot abscesses arise, then place moistened fabrics in rose oil on the site, and while treating the area where the abscess is, let the patient lie carefully on his side, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	about the fracture of the neck:
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it can bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention to whether his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in many conditions, and if he is mute and feels well when one presses and pricks him, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the ailment will be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will recover or not, pay attention to whether his feet are soft, and whether the signs are in his hands, and there is windiness and urination without willing it; and when he is pressed on his belly, there is urination without willing it. And when he is pressed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortally ill: do not labor in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these signs do not occur, the condition is more mild.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, using rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, one should cover it with the palm of one's hand; and remove the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the 'head of the cow', put your thumb in your left hand, and place it equally in your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage on top, if you need to; then bind it tightly, and if there are bones dislocated, do the same, then remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be a slight shrinking at the head; and it will bend to one side, and the patient feels pain in that spot, and there will be a point and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And its restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the fracture; and you know which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is only at the head, then put that fracture in line with the rest of the bone so that it is in a natural shape.Et si la brisure est au pardedens soulement, si met cele sus le chief tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it inclines inward, then have the patient lie on his stomach until the setting of that fracture is prepared.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, then apply the plaster, and then place a wooden or leather splint on top, and bind the fracture so that it does not move; and apply the linen under the rib cage until the fracture is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful bumps appear, do not touch them until the painful bumps are soothed, and apply what we have described earlier; then return to the healing process, and bind it as it should be, if there is no bad outcome; and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder; and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a rod straight and smooth, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with ropes and raise them up, and seat the patient on a chair; then let him gently hang his broken arm over the rod, until it comes to rest, and have a curve in the rod, then let him lean back onto something heavy or let his ministers hold him down; then let his assistants bring the broken joint together as evenly as possible, so that the joint returns to its proper place.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then let one minister hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other minister hold below at the end of the rod, and each pulls their respective ends.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then press down on one side under the fracture and up on the other, and stretch each of the joints in their direction. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, then you should put a light bandage underneath the shoulder pad, and another towards the neck, under the fracture; and also, if the fracture is towards the neck, a light bandage should be placed gently without labor, so that the fracture is even both in place and on the neck; then adjust the fracture as it should be, and press it, if no hot abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if hot abscesses come, do not tighten it for 7 days; then put cool linen in vinegar and rose oil on the hot abscesses until they are soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then raise the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or breast; and put a cloth, and press onto the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its natural place, unless something keeps it from being so, or if the bone is displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and put a wider and stronger splint on the fracture, with a space of two fingers between each splint, and let each splint be as long so that it passes the fracture by three inches on each side; then tighten onto the splints as I said at the beginning of the chapter, more firmly and less in moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seating of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, at the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the binding every three days, so that itching nor swelling come to the spot, nor the growth come to the member because it is too tight. Then release it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents come, then unbind it after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put underneath the shoulder one cushion full of wool equally, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, nor the binding become soft; then release it by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have previously mentioned, so that the food is in the first subtleties; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be healed within 40 days; then one should unbind it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the spot. And if the constriction is bad and swollen, let it remain bound for 1 or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "bone-pair"; one is small and lies beneath the armpit, and the other is large and lies beneath the small bone; sometimes only the large bone breaks, or the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When only the small bone is broken, its restoration and healing are easy; but when only the large bone is broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when both are broken together. If it is only the small bone that is broken, then one should gently extend and straighten it.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large bone, then one must pull harder; and extend the arm on .1. cushion, and raise the armpit of the hand higher than the other, and the small bones lower than the other bones, and have the patient cross his arms over his chest, and place .1. cushion in front of him so that he does not suffer any strain; then extend the minister's arm above the part under his hand, or to .1. ligament, and another minister at .1. the other above. Then one should straighten the member according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking there are pieces, one places each in its place, and if there is any dislocation that pinches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then split it along the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken singularly about it in this chapter; then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of restoration, abscesses occur, then apply a dressing of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and lay a dress over it subtly, until the hot abscess is relieved. And then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of mill-powder with egg albumen, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be a little stronger and larger than the others; and understand that he must have six bandages on his arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less as time goes by, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or dry; and let the thread with which he is being bound be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And change the bandages and the sling after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes on it, then you must wet the member with warm water until those itches are relieved; and let the member not be bound but rest. And then resume the binding, and if the bandages are softened and the bones separated, and anything like that, then dress it again.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you see that the nourishment cannot come to the member because it is too bound, then you must soften it a little, and leave it thus for several days, until the nourishment runs to it, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days have passed; then let him keep his hands on his neck, and let his neck remain even, and guard against movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the composition and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and around the fingers there are few fractures, and they only come from bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should stretch his arm out straight in front of him evenly; then he should put his hand on the ground, and stretch out the broken bones, and put them back together evenly, the minister, as far as the injury extends; and if there are no abscesses, then put on a plaster and bandages; then wrap it in a single linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a bandage of rags, and instruct the patient to press it against his broken plant; then squeeze it with a long strip of cloth, and let the mark of the finger be as large as the palm of the hand, and squeeze it as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the arm, you must put a splint on top and another underneath in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, set it straight as it should be and then squeeze the hand, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture and keep it from moving; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or another, set it straight and bind it with the finger next to it; or bind them all together while holding it steady, or you can put a splint on top of the finger like a thumb; take care in the restoration and treatment of a hot abscess, and treat any pus that arises as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see this when they bend forward and backward; and their healing is by binding one band above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And let the patient lie on his face, then extend each band equally to their respective parts; and this is how it is done when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one band should be towards the buttock, and the other band below the fracture. And likewise, if it is near the knee, then the band should be beyond the knee, and the extension should be downward; then place the splints so that the bone is aligned with its natural shape, and then apply the poultice and the bandage, unless an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if the patient has a hot abscess, then let it subside and then return to your treatment and care; the bandage is done in the following way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap a bandage around the fracture, a thick one folded in half or two layers, and leave it loose, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the nail, and thread a long piece of string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the string come up above; then turn the bandage over the leg and thigh, then put splints on the fracture, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the binding even, then start to tie it firmly in three or four places around the fracture; as you go higher above the fracture, make the binding looser; then take hold of the two ends of the string that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and tie the three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the string, so that it comes under the foot; tighten it so that it doesn't move from its place, then leave it like that until any swelling or bruising goes down and no new ones appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if something happens, then loosen it and adjust what has happened, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that are poking out, they should be removed if possible; if not, the area should be split open and drained, and the wound treated as we have described, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thigh is broken like this when splints are put on, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, when restored in this way, it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the neck is restored within a day, or less or more, depending on the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	You should know that in the groove of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a split, or an opening, and it happens with all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put it back in place with tweezers, as long as he can; then put on the ointment, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions that we have given for other fractures, such as a hot abscess and similar; then treat each incident as appropriate, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You should know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is properly called the "mustelz" and the other the "foscile"; and all manner of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the procedures are the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the smaller bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath. Then administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and ease it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take two wooden splints that prop up the leg on either side, and let them be as long as from the knee to below; then wrap two bands above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, made of wood, and they put the leg upon it to guard against movement, and properly do they treat that in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of bone fracture at the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes there is a bone fracture at the foot and in two ways, and there is no more force than that in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bone of the foot, and you see the bones on top of one another, then put the foot of the patient on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, then press down until they return to their places; then apply the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two flat sides underneath the belly of the foot, then bind it to the foot securely, and then wrap cloth and other materials around it as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the binding, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there is a broken bone in the toe, then set it as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the toe, and let it be slightly wider, then place underneath the foot that small board I mentioned earlier, and tighten it securely; and if there are one or two, or more, broken bones, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already discussed; and treat each incident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the bone in the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's shoulder is broken, have her sit with her back bent forward and held from behind. Then fill the wound with cotton, placing pieces as large as an egg inside it; then make the woman stand up and gently twist her back from side to side, causing the cotton to move within the wound until the bone has moved back into place. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. You may also take a goat's bladder, attach a tube to its opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the tube until it is swollen. This will cause the bone to return to its proper place. Then fill the wound with cotton and leave it there for several days until it has healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the shoulder in either a man or woman is broken, treat it as we have described for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who give it their attention and follow my instructions in this book. For the breaks show us the correct path to healing in many ways; so listen to them.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	For a broken penis, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap it with cloth and leave it for three days, checking on it daily, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	One who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, like the fracture of the thigh or shoulder or similar, should be treated now, as the bleeding we have described attests.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then resume reducing the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, then leave the reduction until the next day, waiting for the abscesses to subside; do not touch or treat them on the third or fourth day, for you would risk causing a harmful incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, then you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not apparent to you for putting it in place with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its thickness depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to cut a three-inch or four-inch piece, depending on how much he needs for each fracture treatment; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the affected limb during your work, and narrow in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a «palainche», so that the curved head of the bone should be placed on the visible end of the bone; and bend it once, as far as it will go, and make it even with the other one. And if the fracture is fine, and the instrument cannot hold the bone well, then you should cut the end of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot put the bone back in place as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Then do thus that it may be in its place: moisten a cloth with black, styptic wine, and apply it neatly if it is on the shoulder; and put nothing on the wound with grease, so that pus and corruption will come; then administer this when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and bind the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the binding; and many times fools have done this and brought about death or corrosion on the patient. And let the binding be softer and looser than other bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is large or deep and you doubt that an evil accident will come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the spot, then do not put anything over the wound; but wrap around, instead of the bandages, hard rags, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days that pus is coming out of the wound, remove what you have put over it altogether, and apply ointment to heal wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and cured.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot heal but keeps dislocating the bowstring, know that there are small pieces of bone in there causing the pain. So you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all those broken pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption develops in the wound, then it should be treated as described earlier in this chapter. If the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like in the thigh or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not touch it, for often death can occur; instead, leave it alone until it scabs over, perhaps after 20 to 30 days, then clean the wound if possible, and if not, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come upon the healing
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, there is an ugly appearance to the limb; and often the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the nose is swollen: use astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, and similar others, grind them up and mix with wine or egg white or garlic; put it on the nostril as a poultice, hold it tightly in place for several days, then remove it and start again until the swelling is gone; or tie it with a well-fitting piece of plaster, for the property of the plaster is to draw out all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, cut away the top and open up the excess; or have it cut by a surgeon so that it is removed, and then heal it.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	from the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and frail, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you feed the patient, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and the minister bathes him, and gives him joy and leisure; then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great swelling, and often wash it with tepid water, until the swelling goes down to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	then the limb becomes straight after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is crooked after healing, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: therefore do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many fools have done this in our land, and these actions are blamed, and great harm results, and sometimes death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, then they should be washed with hot water, or soft herbs should be cooked, such as leaves of comfrey, and roots, and mallow, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and one makes .a softening ointment, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and one takes the mucilage of comfrey, and mixes it with tallow of cow's milk or oil of hempseed, and applies it to the affected area; or one takes fat figs, and grinds them with horse dung, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the dislocation is eased by continuously rubbing and massage with moist hands. And movement should be encouraged in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistiness is awake and hardened, as in stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then one must cut it up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put cotton and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, one should immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the area will swell and if one tries to reset it, it may cause pain. Therefore, one should not move it during the time that it is swollen as this can often bring on spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Nevertheless, when this happens, if the patient bleeds, then let him, so that the abscesses will be soothed; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and heal each member as the healing comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws are dislocated downward, and both dislocations have two types: they are slightly pulled out of place and slightly softened, or they are completely dislocated and hang down, with saliva dripping from the mouth that cannot be held closed, and the tongue is wrapped in speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can be resolved with various treatments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the operator holds the head of the patient and pushes his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if it is on one side; and the other two hands are free to apply pressure evenly. He instructs the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she looks at it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is stuck, especially when it's the two jaws together, then heat them with hot water and oil, until you reset them lightly; do not twist at all in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then put on damp cloth in rosin ointment made from oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft ligatures.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	And let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor struggle at all, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are bound.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what he wants easily, and do not exert himself to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well bound and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and usual sores come about, and perhaps stomach problems, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is deadly; and often the person it happens to dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the rib cage within its range of motion, nor from the foot; it is sometimes dislocated in a fall, and this is easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return to place. Then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the shoulder joint which is near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it does, and if it sometimes returns to place, then reset it as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, and tie it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and likewise is the shoulder joint of the spine reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways. One of these is that it dislocates at the part of the acromion below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates above, but this rarely happens.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the acromion, especially in those who have little flesh, because in these it is very forceful; but in those who have enough flesh, it dislocates gently, and returns gently.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that there is a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And a dislocation is understood to be when it is lower down towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it at the touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if children are affected.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand upward, then place your fists underneath the shoulder, and forcefully lift the joint upward into its proper position; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it back down; this should bring quick relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come back into place within a few days as we have described, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and soothing and softening ointments should be applied, such as a decoction of alder and fenugreek and milkweed in water, and the affected area should be massaged.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should lie on their back, and a layer of lamb's wool that is neither too soft nor too hard should be placed underneath the shoulder joint; then the assistant lifts the heel onto the sto, and pulls up on the head of the shoulder gently, while pulling down on the affected hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; the shoulder will return immediately, and if you see it dislocated again, reset it according to this method.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and you should have a man present who is taller than the patient; he should stand straight toward the armpit of the patient, push up under the shoulder joint from below, and lift the shoulder joint upward, so that the patient hangs in the air by his arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can use a heavy object, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it can also be reset in another way: one should stick a long stake into the ground so that the head is at the same height as a finger, and not too big or too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should stand for a long time; then the hand should be extended downward on the other side gently, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return due to all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a brand two yards long and four fingers wide, which has a handle for ease of use, and insert it under the joint according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it to the top of the brand with soft cloth so that the brand does not hurt the patient, then place it under the joint of the patient; and extend the arm above the shoulder, and tie the shoulder to the brand, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a wooden board, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you should then place a sphere of wool equal in size under the joint, then apply the prepared plaster with powdered millstone, incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around it, then tighten it under the joint gently, and tie the string over the plaster, and hug the hand to your chest, and let the hand remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And one should eat little, as long as the limbs are being healed, because they will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not柔軟, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come to it, or for any other reason, then you should apply cauteries to 3 openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after 7 days, and the joint doesn't hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be properly aligned.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, and in the breasts, or behind, are caused by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, there is cracking in the limb, and over time with movement, then the patient should use the bath many times until that cracking is relieved and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	about dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with pins, and it returns with pins; and if it is dislocated everywhere, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the neck of the patient with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it as soon as any abscess forms there, for if an abscess were to form there, it would be difficult to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance death ensues.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands be bent according to the elbow, around, over, and under, and push the joint to his armpit together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in the front, it returns when he bends his hand to his hand and presses from the root of the palm to the elbow which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and one minister bends the arm, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then you have wrapped a long, double drapeil;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the surgeon examines a joint in his hand, he should grease it with oil to soften the joint, then bend it back into place so that it heals.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, he should apply a dry poultice with egg white, then bend it firmly, and bind the arm to the collar of the patient, leaving it for several days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, loosen the binding and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not healing well, repeat the poultice and binding, and leave it for several days until it is firmly in place; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels stiffness after the joint is put back in place and it moves, then bathe and massage him gently, and press until he is relieved; you can also put a fat lamb's snow on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it and have him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then replace the bandage, and then enter the bath; and do this 1 or 2 times until he is healed; and if you see [any improvement], place warm cow's milk mixed with butter on top, and hold it in place; then it will return to its normal state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	When the dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is gentle, more so than other joints, nevertheless, it must be put back into place gently, at the same time that it was dislocated, provided that the place is swollen or that a hot abscess has formed there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of putting it back into place is to have the sick person lie on a table, and extend his hand, and look at it and put it in line, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you should check that it is in its proper place; then have the patient lie on his back on a table, extending and bending his arm.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient lie on his back on the table, and the examiner place his hand over that appearance at the joint. If it now goes back into place, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing poultices to soothe abscesses, and leave it like that without re-examining it.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after a few days, then the joint will remain twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is weak and cannot extract anything at all; then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is nothing else to do but to cauterize near the wound, and by chance nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster we have described, then straighten it and leave it for .v. days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any cracking, moisten it with warm water, and rub it until it heals.Et s’il advenist que li nerfs fuent copez, si ne puet movoir li membres, si le met sus l’emplaustre de la piere fendeit, et li frotte sus li nerfs tant qu’il soit sanez; car il ne peut sanz nerf.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	At times, they are dislocated on both sides of the hand, sometimes on the back of the palm or the underside;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then pull at the fingers and bring the dislocation back into place, then hold the head of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be for two days, and then put it in place that same day; and don't lie down at night as we have said, but stay up during the day, make it move, and then lie down again. Do this frequently until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated on the underside of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed; and do likewise if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the neck
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the bowels move without voluntary effort, and one cannot hold it back; many times a limb, or both legs, or an arm, or one leg, become paralyzed.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the neck becomes paralyzed in four parts; that which is paralyzed at the back is called "paralysis":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The cure is to determine if the disease has its origin in childhood; if not, there is no cure or healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of curing by great words, it has not brought much benefit in all cases.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the disease that comes from the feet forward, there is no healing or health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also one who comes straight from both sides, and cannot be healed except by him who properly comes from the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and let the patient stretch his face forward equally on both sides, and let him keep still under him so that he does not move;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a brand into the head of the patient in the ground, and another under his feet, and tie a string underneath the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and let two ministers hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two brands;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well closed, the brand as we have said, and let the patient place his palms on the spine until it straightens.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board three yards long, and cut under the skin, and let the patient lie on his side, and insert the end of the board under the skin, then place the middle of the board on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and let the patient place his feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until it is straightened out; and if you see that it happens in the joint that turns to the hand, do it there.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should insert two brands at the head of the patient's arm, and two more near his feet, with a space of about a palm between each brand;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each stake a hole, where the thread will turn around, and firmly drive the stakes into the ground so that they do not move; and between every two stakes there should be one turning stake, over which the thread turns, and between two turning stakes there should be two small stakes of the length of a palm, for the thread to turn around;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the thread which is among the stakes to the turner at the head, and the other thread to the feet at the other turner, and each of the ministers turns their turner all the way along the thread, and the master puts the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equalized, then put on a drying plaster with an egg white, and then the bandages, and then the pillow of a tablet three fingers long, which purples the area of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a thread as we have said, and use the sick person with subtle care until they are healed.Et quant il sont sanez, si li maistres met sus la partie de l’espondile qu’el est sainne emplaustre umectatif, et li ministres tornent li tornet, si com nos avons dit, et lou maistres qui li tien le chief et les piez, et li ministres qui li tient le corps entre les bras, qui ont li tornet devers la partie qu’il a sainne, si remuient li corps en l’estele tant qu’il se puet mover,
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And when they are healed, then the master puts a moistening plaster on the healthy part of the spine, and the ministers turn their turners as we have said, and the master who holds the head and feet, and the ministers who hold the body between their arms with the turners towards the healthy part, move the body in the pillow as much as it can be moved,and if anything comes in the end of healing, then one should administer softening and soothing medicines, with the pillow we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes they apply a piece of plaster
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes it appears in the last vertebrae of the back, and one believes that it is a dislocation; but it is the bone which appears, so one must not have any presumptions about it: by chance it could bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only become dislocated, and do not become so like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is healing according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and mostly inside, and a little healed in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee is more open than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the area which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes from within, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens from the front, are that his leg is well according to their accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot, and he retains his urine, and the veins swell, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind, are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you examine whether the dislocation is recent, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no treatment; and it must not be allowed to become presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for that which the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four manners of dislocation, you hasten to return the joint, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left; by chance it will return, and does not need any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a very strong bandage, and stretch the leg very firmly with two hands, or with one tied around the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another bandage stretches his hand above in such a way that he pushes his hands under his shoulders, then the tightens a leather thong around the thigh; and another tightens a leather thong around his head;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend both upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, one must apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, one should press upon the patient's healthy side, then place the ligature over the root of the thigh and the part beneath the armpit, then extend the ligature upward toward the armpit and the arm;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then grasp another minister's arms and embrace the large part of the affected thigh, and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is more minor than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in this manner which we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong woolen bandage over the two heels and over the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let him be hung from the top of a post, and let him be two arms' length above the ground; then command one assistant to grip the head of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, gripping the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is restored, let the patient lie as we have said for those with rigidity, and bind one bandage tightly on the affected leg, and another on the foot as well.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two hot embers, one on the head and one on the foot, then insert a hot ember between the thighs in the form of a V.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and has moist bandages placed around it so that it does not bleed, then extend each limb towards him, and the assistant holds steady, making sure the dislocation is aligned with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put the patient on a table and press it as we have said in the section on dislocations, and lay him on his unaffected side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, one must extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant must put their weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is backward, one must not extend the affected side downward or lift it up off the ground, but it must be positioned as if the hip was dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on one's side with both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and restrain it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then restrain it as before and let him rest for 3 days, then release the bandage and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it is not dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then you know it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his chest, and place his foot upon your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your palms, and pull gently between your thumbs, then bend the two sides of the knee gently; and have another minister extend his foot while you pull the knee gently back into place; the sign that it is returned to its place is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And apply the plaster and make the leg bend at the thigh, and hold it together tightly for three or four days, then release it; and the patient should not walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the member is not healed, then administer strong stretching as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes crushed, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And its signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it feels sore at the place where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the movements should be gentle, and one should gently straighten out the elbow with their hand when it is only strained.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from all sides, one should make the patient sit upright, and hold them by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards and press the foot firmly upwards;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back in, that is good; if not, then restart the operation, for it will go back in.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot go back in like that, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and push a stake firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie blankets around him so he does not move;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then one assistant pulls the leg at the knee, and another assistant stretches the foot out at his hands or with a cord, so that it is stretched out straight;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each assistant pulls equally, and the stake should be pushed further between the buttocks of the patient to hold him in place as he is stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then let the surgeon hold the dislocation steady with his hands, and have an assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, then put the bandage and padding on top, and press it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, taking care not to bind the nerves behind the ankle too tightly;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, then tighten it; then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and the patient may go about their business in four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that time, it is not safe that he does not relapse again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, you must calm them as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the armpit
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be stretched without strain, and that is an easy matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the shoulder or foot, you should have the patient lie on his back on a flat surface or table, completely straight, and place his foot on something that applies pressure to the joints, then press firmly on the foot until it pops back into place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two notches, then pull it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to heal it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not experienced in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not wise, compassionate, and slow to act, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, apply hot poultices to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then immediately reset the dislocated joint so that the hot abscesses can heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the dislocated joint is reset, then administer hot poultices to soothe the abscesses and treat the wound with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with broken bones, then follow the instructions given in the section on simple fractures.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and keep yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for that will lead you astray according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapons and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here ends the Roman book of physics
