O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical art with its contents and I have finished it by way of its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say, "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And for this reason the work by hand is well-treated in our region and is completely different from all others, so it has the science and the knowledge, and there is nothing left to be desired from the force of the hands but the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	For it seems to me that I should revive it with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abridgment; and will come with the forms of the iron instruments of cauterization, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as is appropriate.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this should master the science of anatomy, as Galileo says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of nerves and veins and the number of joints, and movement and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, it is said by Hippocrates that with hands alone one cannot do anything well, and with work one can; above all in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that he who is not familiar with the things mentioned above should take care not to make a mistake or harm people; so I have often wanted many of those who engage in this science and have abandoned themselves to it without knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess out of the scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he took out a piece of the bladder and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen a patient called for an operation, and saw the dislocation of the patient and the size of the stone; and if one operated on him, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors of ignorance drew the break on top of the wound with great pain, leaving no scar in the wound and finished it thus; and he commanded that it should not be removed; and he delayed thus until the leg was completely frozen and the bones came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I did so, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of cure have been tried out or the limb, and it cannot be healed; and the corruption does not cease to spread through the limb as long as the limbs are all lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder that would cause an abscess to become putrid and then inflame because of the evil of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholy humor, does not come to touch it except with iron in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, good son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these divisions in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For whereas it is necessary that you keep yourself thus, so that the false mirage may not speak ill of you; If you take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be loosed; and leave behind you the expected diseases of grief health; and hold your weapons from that which causes you to doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to another one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiéens díst en aunes dis amonestemens: "Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez appelez fol mire.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	» I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are on fire and water cauterizations and medical treatments, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the beginning to the end, as well as the shapes of instruments, the fermness of cauterization, and everything else that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters deal with cutting and piercing, suction cups and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapters are ordered and describe the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; it is ordered that the heads of the shoulders be cut as little as possible, and that the forms of instruments be described.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I speak about the quality of aid and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and the harm is the most distant word, subtle science and hidden replies; and many wise men would speak about it, and agree with what I say; and I am short of words, for I shorten my speech.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that all kinds of aid cauterize, except for two types of complexions: one hot and moist and the other dry and damp.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together the substance, neither agreed nor said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is of no help to disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor by dryness; and he who says that cautery does great help to hot and dry diseases which come upon men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, there is no more difficulty in this but he who has experienced it, and who knows by long practice the properties of the cautery, and the variety of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the symptoms and the space of time; for the other complexions we have no fear, even though there are cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them agree and are in harmony with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that fire cautery is more effective if it is applied to wounds that have already been treated, and it has much greater beneficial power than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is wounded, and does not harm another member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by moving away, and they bring about the disease of grief through healing; and perhaps for its height and for the power of its substance it does not cause an excess, if there is not an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I have found this by experience and through the long service and study that I have devoted to this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore, I apologize for the length of my words, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret which is revealed in fire, and of the quality of the result, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his explanations; so accept it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be performed at the right time, and they should be prayed over.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the harm that overtakes is prevented by the aid of cauterization; and most importantly, the cauterization is for necessary pains that cannot be delayed until a greater harm comes upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think once, my son, as they do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they believe, because cauterization is nothing but medicine that changes the surface, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of its quickness, and for its virtue and nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And if possible, choose a medicine according to the complexion of the sick person and the place where the disease is located and its virtue; and all excesses are united in him by acquiring meat and similar things, unless cauterizes are administered at the place where he has little excess and moisture, as cauterizes of heat due to pain, and similar things, and like pain does not return again; but it happened a little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why the cauterization of the derries is considered a medicine, and that's it; but they don't believe that cauterizing them after medicine is useful, but their intentions are wrong, and this cauterizing of the derries is useful for whatever reason when we administer ways to treat various diseases and they do not work, then let us administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterizing the derries is useful for whatever reason when we administer ways to treat various diseases and they do not work, so let us administer the cautery, and it will be useful; but it is not according to the intentions of the foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Li ancien dirent que cauteres d'estrument d'or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualite de l'or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n'est mie voir car je l'ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c'est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d'or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	The ancient ones said that gold-tipped instruments were less prone to rust than those made of iron, and they only mentioned the qualities of gold and its high purity for such instruments; they said that the tips of cauterizing instruments do not cause sores, but this is not true as I have proven it through experience, and I have found that in some people they do. Gold-tipped instruments are more durable than those made of iron, as they claim.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use our fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For in this chapter on the head of the shoulder, order it so that the view is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	For this cautery with olive oil is for the head, and by reason of moisture and coldness on the head, and because of many humors that descend from the hair, and to the ears, and for many troubles and pain in the teeth and in the jaw, and most importantly for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and sodomy and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be cleansed with a medicine that softens the head, or three or four times according to the virtue and its effect and its custom for the patient to bear it; and then do the cauterization on the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the cross between your hands, and put your hands on his skin; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between its two eyes; and let where you came from, if he bleeds, then heat the cautery that is called "olivaire", of which there is this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place the cross between your hands, and put your hands on his skin; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between its two eyes; and let where you came from, if he bleeds, then heat the cautery that is called "olivaire", of which there is this shape: And the place on the mark of ink, and make going down and extracting your hand little by little returning; then remove your hand is holly, and reward the place where you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, then start the cautery as long as you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of silk, and put wet cotton inside, and put on the mark, and leave it III days; after that put dry cotton on it; and leave it until it is heated up; after that cure the wound with ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon" as long as he is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old man said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it will infect; and for this reason if you apply help quickly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one must leave the fire cautery in place for so long that part of the bone is burned; and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one must leave the fire cautery in place so long and press it down so hard that the bone is broken as wide as a woman puts her finger in order for the humors to come out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that, one must heal and treat.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of fire cautery do not seem good to me in all cases except those men who have a tendency to fear; and I think that I should leave it longer; for the joint is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and even more so when the joint of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first impression of the cautery seems good and gentler to me, and from which I act in such a way that it is salutary.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old woman's pain at the top
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the whole head comes to be in chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one must use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', and head cleansing and oils and poultices; and if one does the cautery that we have just said above, it will not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize it lightly as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have made the cauterization on each of the head's horns as we have said above, and you make a vessel there; then put the ventuses there; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: the patient will feel too much pain from this cauterization than from others, which I will speak about later; and it is necessary for the cornes' cauterizations to be thinner than those with which we cauterize the hair of the head, and this is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is sudden pain in one part of the head up to the oil, and the headache is prolonged, and the scalp is cleaned with medicines that are different from water, and other cures have not helped: then do cauterization according to two ways, namely fire cauterization and water cauterization.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization of medicine ague is such that you squeeze a bit of aloes, and remove the bark and cover it with oil at the scalp, and then apply it to the head where the pain is in two ways: first, heat it by placing the aloes on fire; second, place it under oil. Then, when it has cooled, rub the oil into the skin; and when it has been rubbed in, leave it there for twelve hours or more; then remove it and apply ointment to the wound, leaving it for two or three days; then cover it with cotton dipped in linseed oil until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this fire cautery is not effective, then take a look at some of the burning medicines that I have written or in the second treatment of medicines that burn.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery so that it is this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has I pit of corbeure, and at the middle to a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the pain of the keur is burned; and let go of your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and runs abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in wax, and put it on the place for III days; then I put cotton wet in butter, and then cure the place of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", all along the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	for migraine
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If this caustic does not suit the disease and the patient is suffering, causticize it in one place at the top as we have said, and cure the wound once it has healed; and if you see, administer the caustic that we have mentioned or the extract of the artery with the scalpel that has two blades; and this caustic is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied fluid medications and other treatments that we have spoken of in the division, and the pain does not go away, then warm this poultice called "poins", and it is shaped like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the poultice all around the painful ear, or around both ears where the pain is felt, and moving away a little from the ear's root where you have marked the place of the joint; apply 10 poultices around each ear; then cure the joint until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Which must be cured by fire is only true of those that move with fluidity, as we have said in the division of diseases; and not to apply fire to similar things that come from scorching and spider webs.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	How you treat this appearance of torture which is moved by the flood of mare's milk and the purging of the head and gargling, and that does not help, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with III cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part which opens healthily, and make the cautery on the top of the ear a little bit away from the horn of the head, and another also far away as a little bit; and leave the cautery there as long as the half of the burn is done; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker; after treating the place as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then do IIII cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I cut the head off, and I put it in water called "vesselz" as we have said before, and a second cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured thus as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lime.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	It is a disease that gives the patient great years and pilules that make the brain mad; after he takes all the head of the patient, and puts on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written or treating plasters; and this is the way of cauterizing: do it thus as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus, it is good; and if not, do III cauterize the head by cutting down to the collar, and keep a space of II inches between each cauterization; and treat thus as well as the others, and if he seems to twitch, and the patient is suffering, do one cauterization in the middle; and it is necessary, II others on the II horns, and treat thus as long as he is well; and do the cauterization which is called "oliver", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed thoroughly and with what we have said above; then, after washing the head of the sick person, apply the fire cautery to the head and each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, then apply four cauterizations to the spine of the back; and let it be until the last of the three is burned, and raise your hand; after the cure as long as it is healthy, and the cauterization that is called "olivare" which we have said above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy Do not apply fire cauterization to the head except for those who are feverish; it is necessary first to wash the skull with yeres and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section on treatment when the patient is ill and suffers greatly from medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot suffer the fire, let him gargle and chew bone-broth often with meat; then after that let the king put his hand into the mouth, and make the fire according to what we have said before, and make the cauterization on the head, and on each horn; and if the disease is far advanced and painful, make the cauterization as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the neck, in the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauterization be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is far advanced and painful, make the fire cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excess fluids or腐敗 and thick pus, then the fire cautery on either side as we have said to him who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if for the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moistened, then he does him a drinking thing so that his brain is purified, according to what it is in front in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After reseting the head of the patient; after making a well-formed turban out of linen, as well as a circle, by putting it on the head; and making the patient sit with his back crossed and well held on all sides; then present the liniment, and anoint him with old butter; and heat the turban with moderate fire so that he can bear it; after emptying the circle inside the turban and letting it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with another good treatment, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see cauterize the neck by making punctures in all places.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing moistens the skull; and then put cotton soaked in molasses on it, in butter, and in cow's fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient one thing purifying the skull, and warding away all moisture, and making it sweat or bathe many times while fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has instructed the patient about the hair, and made a cauterization on his skull, and made two cauterizations on the temples because the hair is together there, or because one is there, and covered all the cauterizations with cow's fat; and warding away any blood let or beating of the heart that he might stop it. If you see too much blood come out, then restrain it with a cloth so as not to spill.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of caution how to stop it flowing; and no one does cauterization or hastens its stopping with the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	the two walls of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or release the arteries that are in appearance the head backward; and it is seen that it is cold and phlegmatic excesses, then do I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the eye descending to the tears: I cauterize the top, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations where haters take the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes it well above the socket at every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the two walls of the eyes within the tears
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have done the medicine according to what we said in the division, and it does not help, then don't drink three times a day for three days; after that, take up the head, and do cauterization with olive oil; and do two cauterizations with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two ends, a little hair-shaving the hair; and guard the artery so that you don't cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	for
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you have done two cauterizations on the two ends as long as the ends of the paper are; and do not remove your hand except for so long as a third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	دو شعر که از موهای سر بیرون می‌آید
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	For the hair that comes out of the oils, and when they touch the oil, they make two kinds of fire: namely fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and equal in length, then place the patient on your chest; then sign on paper a figure that is also like the furrow of the hand, and this is the beginning of the sign to remove the hairs; then put cotton wet with urine and musk of mink on the oil, then heat the cautery so that this is its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the affected area little by little several times so that the wound does not hurt, and the signs of health of the work are that you see paper retire, and hairs stand up at the tip of the oil; then raise your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton moistened in oil until the scorch is healed; after the cure of the wound until it is well.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on this same middle level, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural position, and is even, and do not touch the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cautery is that you command the sick person to leave the hairs long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the Myrtle leaf; then take of French soap and hot salt, each one a 1/4 measure, and grind them well together; and do it hastily, so that he does not cool down, then spread on the parchment with the eyes; and if the sickness is only in one eye, then must be applied to both; and pour out cotton moistened in oil into a tin of unguent; and the sick person's eyelids are in your healthy hand and put your thumb on the medicine, and press it little by little every time that the sick person feels the medicine tickle, for he feels the tickle also as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have been sick for a long time, then take this medicine at your tongue.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blister has passed, if the poultice is raised up, and you see the paper also raised as if it had been raised by fire or by incision; and if so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then put the medicine back on the place where it had been, as long as your wounds are even and your hairs well-groomed; then put cotton wet in vinegar on the wound called "dysenteric" and other wounds, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to care for your wound with great care so that it does not get irritated by the medicine's hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the poultice becomes soft after that, and the hairs stick in the oil, then begin again the medicine on the same place where the poultice is soft, properly as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the salve of mirrhe:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this, their constraints; and do not reply to those who have been taught this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For the treatment of fistulas by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating fistulas as we have explained in the section on diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and wipe his eyebrows with a damp cloth or juice of pease on oil; then heat the cautery until it is red hot; and put it on the eyebrow as if it were the shape of a feather, together so that the fire touches both ends; but whatever way you do it, it is best for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is opened, and treat it with perspiration and dryness; and if it is closed, then operate, and firmly hold the knife; after that place the hot cauldron firmly, and keep your hand away from the cauldron on the part above the oil, so that your hands do not go crazy; and put the cauldron into the fat of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again, and if you need to do it more, let it be for III days; after that put cotton wet in butter on it, and dry out the oinking as long as it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is still healthy, then put corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered; and heal according to what came to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I know one way to cauterize a fistula, which no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Do you understand a fistula, and seal it up; then put in the slit a subtle thread of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I make it in the quantity of one.Z. of vinegar; and hold your hand firmly, so that the vinaigrette does not run into its oil; and you put on the oil to the patient wet cotton in a vat or bath: the vinegar thus artfully placed at the site of the fistula, and the sick person is healed per wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the fire that we have spoken about, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you should administer a punch to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what is suitable in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	in the fissures of the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	These times have caused fissures in the lips, which are called "warts", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then in a small cauldron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it immediately into those fissures as soon as it comes; after the cure, apply the balm of cerote until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the palais or at the roots of the teeth, after having made pus and it has hardened and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is appropriate that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having closed or pierced the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron comes up to the font of the hole, and do so a time or two; after the cure as we have said, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrumpted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure this with medicines, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after that heat the cautery so that its form comes out here in this way that you put a string on the tooth; and put the cautery hot inside, and hold it for so long as your hand feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then let go of your hand and start again with the cautery according to your will; then fill the mouth of the sick person with salt water, and let it sit there for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way the tooth which was moving is fixed, and the gums which were softened are tightened, and the moisture which corrupted is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold, or if there is frost or burning, and medicines do not help, then one should use two types of cauterization: fire cauterization and butter cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	A fire cautery: If it is like this, that you squeeze butter from a cow’s udder, and the tip in a spoon of iron or gold; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and the moisture into butter, and put on the tooth aching gently and keep it as long as it cools down; and so do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and the wool are very wet with butter, and put it on the tooth aching, and put a piece of iron hot enough for the fire to come to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	A fire cautery: If it is like this, that you squeeze the juice from a blackberry bush with your fingers, and the tip in a spoon of iron or gold; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and the juice into a paste, and put on the tooth aching gently and keep it as long as it cools down; and so do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton is very wet with the juice, and put it on the tooth aching, and put a hot piece of iron onto it, so that the fire comes to the root of the tooth. Put together a fire cautery if it is like this, that you squeeze the juice from a blackberry bush with your fingers, and let the tip be very hot; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and the juice into a paste, and put on the tooth aching gently and keep it as long as it cools down; make this often, for the pain will increase that same day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the sick person fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then he takes it away; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a caustic out of the cheek that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the poultice:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold moist flumes, and does not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the head of the shoulder according to what you have described above, and make two openings for the fumes to rise on either side of the cautery; and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, wherever it is necessary, until it comes to the root of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and put cotton soaked in oil and butter on top until the burning is over; then cure the wound with ointment and bandages until it is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the leg:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the bones and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by solvents medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and keep back from the taste but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterization be what is called a 'clavicle'; and heal the place as we have said before as long as it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the bones are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorbut, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forelock in the furrow; and another cauterization milks between the breasts; and let the cauterizations be what is called a 'clavicle' according to the form which is before you.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a cauterization by poking all the way to the "poins" which is called the shape in front of the ear disease; and let the "poins" be up to XXX or less.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, follow this method described earlier, and let the cauterization be done in three steps according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those who are less able, do three together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	to prevent the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, place the patient on their back and their side; then apply the fire cautery to the joint in two places as you would with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated inside, use this form of treatment:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize him until he pierces it up to the coast and comes out with the figure of the cautery together 4 cauteries; and because this is made with the cautery that has 3 nerves, for the figure of the cauterization are 4 cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has 3 nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is placed on this nerve for there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After it is placed on the cautery, grind it with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happened, then make the cautery on the thick part of the cautery with a claw, or many cauteries pierce it.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is taken from the bone, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and moisture as it is taken out of its composition, and are multiplied to him, and the customs of cures are used, and he does not benefit, then the patient should be carried on his back, and his legs and hands spread out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From then on he makes three fire cauterions on the shoulder blade from the quantity of a coin, making all the cauterions clavicular, and two cauterions on either side so that they are at three angles as far apart as possible so that they are not joined together when they move, and the cauterion is made so perfect that it burns both sides, and the shape of the cauterions is according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterized with a great cautery the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by piercing and signing on the stomach in one point according to the quantity that you see to encure; then cauterize to all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Regarding the liver, when it has pain from cold and moisture and strong wind, until it is freed from its natural composition due to excesses; and the patient is treated for what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him; if he becomes angry at his enemy, sign three cauterizes according to this form, shape, and quantity on the liver, so as to remove the hypocondria, where the cut of the ombel is; and leave a space between each cautery the size of two fingers; and let the cautery of the long neck, and do not press too hard all the way; and let it be burned with moderate heat halfway through; and let the patient lie on his back, and spread his legs, and lift his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	Et si ta volonté est, que ces cautères de la couture soient scellés, si tu es subtil et sage en l'art, et que tu te gardes de brûler tout le cuir chevelu, car tu pourrais assécher tout le corps; et qu'il n'y ait pas de bouillon, car la couture est très subtile à cet endroit, et c'est par là que l'on voit.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if there is an abscess in the liver, and you need to know whether it is in the fat of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the fat, then feel that the patient feels little pain; and if it is in the membrane, then feel great pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment of the ulcers has ended, then the patient should be made to lie on his side; and then sign where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which seems like a tooth, so that there is no doubt about it:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautery as long as the wounds are burning, and come until syphac, as long as the porreture is all burned; after the cure according to the cure of the sweats as long as he is sane; and it comes to nothing but this cautery use no fire that have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have corrupted not at any time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And then he can take it as hard as possible, and it seems to me that he should leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the plagues,
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	For the pleurisy, the old people said that one should make plagues of root of aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of aristolochia long, the largest that you can find, and dry it, and also make it as long and as thick as your two hands; and soak it in oil, and put it on the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the ligature and the neck, and II small cauteries a little down the part which is desoz the beard; and cauterize II between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining behind a little; and I cautery in the milk, and I another on the stomach, and I between the two shoulders, and II at the cost of the back recently milking the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it open as if you were smelling it.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no old man uses the fire cautery resembling a razor, and he scatters it and places it between the ribs until he reaches the abscess; and they flee from the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they devoted three ways of cauterizing that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is this: you make three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the fire cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient sweat on his back; and another way of cauterizing is this: you heat the cautery which has two ners, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the cautery to the site of the mouse's cut, or the cuts come from left to right, and let the elevation that you feel by touching according to the length, according to the breadth of the body, and the cauterization be according to the breadth.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that you put the two nails on fire until the smell is perceived from the other side, and then place the cauldron firmly, and thus in it there will be four. And if you see it, cauterize all of it with three nails.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has been left to stand for a long time, and this is true that the other cure in front of it must be finished.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Do not cauterize by the method called "ascultation".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure it according to the methods we have described in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit from it, then you must make four cauterizings around the boude (abdominal region), and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the back of the spine, and one on the neck; and let the cauterizings be close to the skin of the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the fire cautery to go away a long time, and do not let the cure of the patient after the cautery; and the healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is the key that we have before us to explain; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints are swollen in those who are hydrophylic, and are yellow in color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in all of it, lest the yellow [color] would be forced out, and the cautery is made according to its form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the knife; and let the cauterization be long, one on the outside of the knee in front and the other behind, facing the foot; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without healing, because they will hurt; after, heal the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and nutritious virtue that is in the stomach and in the intestines is affleбл, and cannot be healed by any kind of treatment; and you will see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do I make a great cauterization on the stomach according to what it has spoken before or the cauterization of the stomach, circulating; and four cauterizations around the navel carefully a little one, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the knuckle, and a cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries on the stomach, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	in the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the root, or one or more, and they are old and large humors of cold and moist putrefaction, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit if cauterizations are made: three on the spine of the back, that which is all further away from the anus is poked little by little in triangulating, and one cauterization is applied to the anus two times; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then apply a large cauterization to the stomach, as stated above, and another to the liver, and another to the bile at all cauterized places, and leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care, let the wound heal until it is well.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh that is called “thel”
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply to the flesh that is called “thel,” if you heat the fire-cauterizer that seems like a razor, and then put it all aflame on the flesh that is coping; and leave it so that the cauterizer comes to the birth of the vein, from which it will not move; do this once or twice, and if there is much of the flesh, cauterize each as we have said; after applying beneficial ointments until they are well; and if you cauterize with a large fire-cauterizer on the armpit, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will tell you in your place, so comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no outlet for the wind, and it is agitated and vomits pus and moisture, then it must be given an extremely subtle treatment, and you must know exactly how much of the treatment is perfect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After warming the caustic that seems like a razor, pour it into the fistula according to the quantity by which the treatment entered, and start again with the caustic until the course of the corruption is burned, once or twice, according to the quantity required; and be careful not to harm the nerves that are in there, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula runs along the course of the bladder and intestine, be careful not to harm these veins, and only use fire in a well- heated place, and believe that it is not dangerous; after treating the area until it is healed, and if the matter is dried up, you will know that the area is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, you will know that the course has been split, and the bone has rotted at its bottom; and thus as one of these that we will describe in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys comes with a strong wind and does not respond to the treatment of women, then it is necessary that you perform a cauterization on the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned above; and if we perform cauterization in the middle, there will be III cauterizations in line, and greater aid will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you perform a cauterization on the back of the bladder, where the hair of the penis comes together, and each cauterization is as long as one inch; and you perform another cauterization behind, where it is necessary to do so; and you perform the clavicle cauterization according to the form described above.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and will not stand for being bred, and the flowers are rotted and come late; and when they come, how much pain they cause: then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the udder, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauterizations be clung to, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hindquarter
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the socket of the hindquarter, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be slippery, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the socket of the hindquarter with a circular cauterization, and mark in front of the joint around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and if so, let the cauterization be like those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have the fire cautery, make three cauterization with olive oil, and let the cauterizations be perfect like all the curers; and treat until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purging the patient with large pills of fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, make the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: that is to say, together with fiery medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is according to many ways, of which one is: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make a good depth and large, and there between each cauterization take the space of two, and let the cauterizations be olive; never do you make a cauterization in the middle on the top of the hip joint, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned in front to the dislocation of the hip: but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the flesh of the leg is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes only to the thigh and leg, do two cauterizations on this side where the patient feels the pain, and one on top of the ankle, three or four times; either cut off the skin, or burn the flesh of the leg; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three toes or almost to the heel, cauterize that spot three or four times with the "poins" caute
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is a barber, let him do more; and if it hurts that the pain goes from the groin to the thigh, let him make a fire cautery or circular, and give him good care in all his cauterizations so that you do not leave it longer than necessary so that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and do not cause great harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have made a cauterization on the heel of the foot and left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the bones as well, and it became pierced and rotten throughout the bones.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution for the stomach which has brought death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, make a fire cauterization in one and in the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cauterization of the hunchback, for this is the way, make one such and another less thick than a thumb nail, or slightly more, and put them between each other, so much quantity as a nut of thumb, and the intertrires to be on both sides, and they are also like nuts, and there should be a good thickness of iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the box of the sick leg, and let it turn on the left shoulder; and let it cauterize once and let it rest three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of poultice until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Al-Buqaqi says that we use little of this cautery because of its burning, and few realize those who use it; but indeed this is a good cautery that can endure it, and let it be where it afflicts.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical cautery that burns should be made with a tool that passes between the edge of the hole and is either made of brass or iron to a distance of two hands, and in height it has II units, and are open above and below, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you have set the hip bone of the horse lying on its side at rest upon the ground, and after you have placed your hand very high up on the hip bone; after you have inserted it between the two circles of hot metal which are heated in the fire until they are red-hot, and left them for an hour, and caused the horse to suffer heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because it will prove a good medicine like fire; and when the medication has been used up, take away your hand with the instrument and lift the horse's leg gently by means of soft awl, and leave it like that for three days, and put on wax as much as the black scorch is healed; and let it be left for three days to come, and that person behind will help after the oozing of the ointments until he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread only to the thigh or only to the leg, make the instrument turn black in the same way that you have done for the horse's hip; and this is the way of hot metal, and I have written it down here as a treatment for rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Get alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take some small hole near where the point of a file can enter; and put that pot on top of another well-lined pot, and place alkali and charcoal and warm water on it, so much as there is two inches above the powders, then leave it like that until it has dried up completely and heated the pot, then take all that water, pour it over the charcoal and alkali, just as you did before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it is very warm and has cooled down in the process of working with medical remedies and other cauterizations, for these things are done as follows: mix them together with honey, almond syrup, and soap.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a remedy where one honourable person was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he mowed the grass, and said that no other remedy was used, and he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this manner that you press down the green and dry chalk, and grind it with a little fat, and put it on the hip and the thigh and the leg where the pain is, and let it be; and leave it for III hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bathe as much as his body is a little warm, and let him get into bed, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's hair, it should be done carefully; and the cauterization must be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and wipe it with oil, and put it on the fold that is between the thumb of your hand and the other which is called the finger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take a dry goat's hair, and dip it in fire until it is blackened, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it has become cold; and do it again, and never cease to do so until you think that the pain has ceased up to the hip, and that there is no more sensation of it; and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterizing with a goat's hair.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from shaking or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of cold material spread out, none of these appearances is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate that after the patient has been voided of foul pills or other similar things, you make a line on his back where the pain is, three lines signed with an inch, and in each line V cauterizes or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterize that is called "poins"; and if you see, make III cauterizes or IIII at the clavicle cauterize according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children and the signs of its beginning are that they have tight posture when they stand up and they fear it; and you will find in the back lower spine and back hair the appearance that comes on top of the other hair.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you see him healed, if you cauterize him with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cauterizes each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, then cauterize inside the spine with fire that is two or three lines long, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, cure the area as long as it remains healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire to gangrene which is in the tissue of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the joints ache from moisture that spreads to each limb, and when pain comes in pieces, which is properly called "podagre," and when it is caused by cold and cannot be healed with medicine, then heal it with fire in this way: Make the fire cauterize the joint of the foot, and let the fire be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you hold on the face of the foot, so it is cauterized with all the cauterization that one claims "no point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, then it is cauterized with three cauterizations of olive oil on each part, and as many more as needed, but do not hold your hand too long except when the skin of the knee is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then the cauterization administered as said in this chapter of the chaplet.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make a line of cauterization of two lines; and if there is still pain in two joints and in the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good government to the sick person and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you do this good government and you purify the pus, then you will be healed by God.
de la routure dou syfac	For the fire cautery
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	If a rupture comes in the armpits, and the bull's testicles descend into the crotch, then it is necessary that when you examine him, he does not move at all; and that he uses things that leave his belly empty, so that the end falls from his belly; after this, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command that he shave his beard as long as his balls are repaired, and then put them in your hands, and sign with your hand above the rupture on the bone of the testicle, and all this is a sign resembling a half circle above the loins; then heat the fire of this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and dry.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then return the balls to their place; and the assistant should not turn her hand back; and well operate on the legs of the patient, and put a cloth and a servant on the legs, and another on the feet that hold her hands; then put the cautery on her knuckles throughout your entire hand, and hold it straight and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not hit it the first time, try again one more time until you reach it; and be careful that the ball does not slip when you operate the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this patient does not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their size, and of adults also large according to their size; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter as long as the scar is healed; after it cure other remedies as long as he is well, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his bandages be kept in place for a long time, so that the ball does not slip when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a good bandage is brought to him and kept for another forty days; and he has good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too loud laughing; and when he does this teaching, then is he entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his paste.
de la routure dou ventre	from a rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, the third cure is done according to its quantity, and let it be heated according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the base of the belly and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another behind it, and with your hand spread all over the past with the nail.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, whether from a strain or from an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical treatment is of no use, then it is appropriate that he be cauterized with the cauldron which is called “poins,” and the cauterization be carried out according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is cured by the first cauldron, that is good; but if not, begin again with another cauldron on top of that one, for it is custom that the cauterization should be applied to the member nearest the pain, so that you must perform the cauterizations until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of trembling
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The month of May is never treated by fire cautery with great help, and least of all does the disease come from the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Do not cauterize the head of the patient in May, lest the disease take hold at the beginning; if it is already present, treat it as described in the division [of treatment], so that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole body; but make five cauterizations: one on the top of the skull, and another at the end of the hairline; two on the two temples, and one behind the ears; and let the fire come down to the bone as far as it can, and let steam from the blood emerge so that the vapors of foul odors may escape; then cauterize the mouse [i.e., the soft spot on the head] according to what is before you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si le malade est partout dilaté; et il perd manifestement, alors il convient que vous lo cautérisez avec ces cautères que nous avons dit au chef, et un cautère sur la nuque neusée, et deux cautères sur l'épine dorsale, et un grand sur la crinière et un autre délicat, et deux grands sur les épaules; et deux sur les côtes, et deux sur le pleurêtre, et un sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et sur les fosses des mains; et veillez à ne pas brûler les nerfs qui sont derrière le cou, de sorte que vous ne les brûliez pas; et ne faites jamais aucun cautère sur l'os du poignet, ni sur l'os de l'estomac, ni sur la foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And if the patient is everywhere swollen; and he loses manifestly, then it is necessary that you cauterize him with these cauterizations which we have said in the head, and one cauterization on the neck neusee, and two cauterizations on the spine, and a large one on the mane and another delicate, and two large ones on the shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the pleuritis, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the pits of the hands; and be careful not to burn the nerves that are behind the neck, so that you do not burn them; and do not make any cauterization on the bone of the wrist, nor on the bone of the stomach, nor on the liver.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the way of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, leave the loin of bread with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When it swells and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not yet healed, then make the cauterization on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little bit entering into the flesh of the cure; and then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is made for cauterization and by hand and by foot and by back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is osteotome; and nevertheless it does not matter if one is not aware of the members and outlets of moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of the barbers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is evident, and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a sharp fire, according to the quantity of the wound, until the blister is opened and its color changes; then treat with flour of beans and lentils, mixed with oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of lamb and blood of pigeon, each in part; and mix them all together, bind them with a bandage, and apply it to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment for leprosy by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leprosy appears at first, and you see it stop, if the cautery with fire that seems like a circle, is applied all around the leprosy spot.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet others say that one should also cauterize the middle of the leprosy spot; and yet I do not think this is good, because I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it work in any case; and the most correct thing is to cauterize all around, with the fire called "circular", as we have said before, in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die or because of the excess moisture that the sick person produces or because of the heat of the illness when it is very hot, and he has little blood, or because of his age; then you see him hurry toward death: then cauterize him with small pieces of fire by pricking; then let him be like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced with all the cauterization, let the fire of the cauterization be hot:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the heart, and let it be such cauterization that the sick person feels heat in some way so that the course of decay is accelerated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called "corrosion," which is nothing more than a members' rot, as it eats away at the members just as fire dries up wet wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in its early stages, burn it with fire, then heat the burns very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after burning all sides, so that the whole corruption disappears, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is taken away.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the burned places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with ointments causing burning.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that a healthy child does not come out, it is good; and if this does not happen, begin the cauterization on the one who has been delayed in his place.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this medicine is never cured with medicine for the fire cauterization; but on the other hand, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said that medicine for the fire cauterization is cured in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come from the stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	For many times it happens that by accidents a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big thing which blisters the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say fire cauterization, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu'il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu'il i ait subtilz marges; apres le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu'il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu'il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaistre de malves sativaiges broyies avec seill, et laisse l'emplaistre sur toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text: 
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by heat the root, and many times happen and in the hands and cut them off, so it is necessary that you bring the fire cautery of hot water; and it is a third way: take a string of iron or steel, or a feather of goose, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say porrels warts; and put the string on her all red, then I put a little of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the string comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and allow the patient a little of the burning of the hot water an hour; then leave it thus, and will be rooted all at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do another, until you have healed all those who are in the root, then cure the wounds that generate pain.
li cure dou trembler	to cure trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold, or a quartan fever or another, so that you make them IIII cauteries or IV on the spine of the back, I cautery between each spine; and I cautery at the feet, and I on the stomach with the olive cautery; then they will stop trembling, and their health will recover from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Now and then, apparent on the body by bad smells, blisters full of pus, which come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If they appear for the first time, then you should make a cautery on each head of the blister: a thin cautery from a vine stem, which is held in the fire, or from the root of a long-worded herb, or with a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never once are the cauterized at the beginning when it appears according to this method, and they cannot grow hair before, but the excess is broken off, and they are healed; but it should be that this is done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there is a great loss of blood from the artery that has been cut to the wound, or incision of the abscess, or cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a bitter thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever there is an artery that needs to be ligated, if you hurry to place your second finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it a little with your thumb, so that the blood does not flow anymore; then take fire with olive oil, both small and large, as much as it is all red; then take I, or more or less according to the size of the wound and its location, and place the cautery on this vein where you hold your second finger, and hold the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you feel pain when you press your thumb above the elbow, and the cauterization burns, take another cauterizing tool that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other until the wound is closed; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that another malady does not come upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short by the cauterization, it can no longer be well healed even if the artery is large, unless one of the four ways we have mentioned is used: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not yet been treated, or by a strong thread tied on, or by medicines put on which have the power to heal without; and let it be tied up and stretched tightly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tightening of the bandage tightly with fire or other burning things upon it, or similar things, if he does not benefit from it, let him do nothing.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirr nor medicine available, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and over the vein; and do not move it, but keep it wet with cold water often until the blood is frozen and thickened and set; and make incisions in front of those whom it concerns to cauterize and use medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for diseases of the body.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the methods and causes and instruments and forms of cauterization are necessary; and I have put this chapter together by that same middle path for those who suffer from a lighter wound than those who are burned.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, O you who hear, that you learn that with this ointment there is greater danger and fear than with the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to take any foolish risks.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the ways of men come many kinds of trouble.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who, because of their illness, die easily due to the foolishness that results from their disease, and its great severity, then you should fear them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these I give you understanding, and say: "Wait, I am going to be sick"; and the disease is disappointing.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you grant consent to these who come to you who have this manner, but put more great confidence in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open widely but carefully from him of whom you are certain, and of whom you might have taken and lost; and use divination and indication in the cures of your sick so that salvation may be converted; and he who will help you to a good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice; and if you will ask for the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in speaking by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizing potions, which I have devised from the top down, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 Dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: 
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and for this reason it seems to me that I should rather allow the use of fire cautery in these cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with water, and the head of the arm turned in every day until he could no longer support it; and the moisture was so great that he thought he would die, and this moisture seemed to me to be gathered between the joint and the bone; and the fire was so great that it entered between the joint and the bone, and the abscess was small, so you cut a large hole in the head of the arm; and also far as we know:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then you make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is causing the bone to dislocate, and you see the signs that the commissures of the head are overtired on each side, and the liquid jumps far out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to its place: then you must split my head three times according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterward, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and oils, and let the scalp be stripped evenly, and feed the patient with dry meat from places that are dry so that the member is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the aperture of the apothecary, and the arrangement of the needle; because there is no before; there is no behind; there is no to the right; and there is no to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Taille therefore the apoplexy, and the swelling of the blood, and do it according to your ability; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and come out in pain, so that the patient dies from the injury of the apoplexy and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Here is a possible translation of the provided text: 
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "catarrah" in either the nose or throat, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not benefit, then the last treatment is to cauterize with what is used to plug the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When the patient has a disease called "catarrah" in either the nose or throat, and the disease is old and the treatment of medicine does not benefit, then when you plug the two arteries with your fingers, the patient should put his head back; after rubbing the place where the arteries are exposed with an harsh cloth, then pull the patient's neck completely from one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and their throats have already been bit; then sign the places behind the ears, then cut each of them with a sharp knife on both sides, until the flesh comes to the bone, and that on both sides.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, plug the sphincter with astringent powder into the artery and cover it with a bandage, also cutting as I have said above.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, let it continue to bleed constantly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery doesn't open to the sight, then measure the quantity of the space of III inches, then sign with your hand and make a cut down to the bone; and what is needed to let the blood flow outside, so it is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to how much the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains on the bone without any pus, if the bandage does not cover the abscesses, then extract the wound and bind it, and cure with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of grating
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient catarrh comes, and the muck from tears and heat in the temples and old feverishness and similar things, and it is cured by ways of medicinal remedies and all that does not benefit him, let us extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient makes his hair grow in his temples, and hears the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not too tight except in some men who are too cold; and if it is tight, the patient takes some cloth, then rubs the place with any rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water as much as the artery appears clearly; then take the sphincter of that which is there:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And then peel the skin lightly as you come to the artery, and then turn it up like pinches, and remove well the threads that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, so turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, then there will be no saving of life in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And turn the blood of the VI parts down to III; and if the artery is large, so that you bind it with two strong threads of silk, which will not come out before the wound heals, and will run away from blood; then cut off the excess that is between the two threads at this moment also, and then, if you see it, so cauterize it with the cautery knife down to the bone as soon as the shoulders are cut; and this is the work of a surgeon, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is helpful to end moisture; for this is more helpful than fire to end moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For in the extraction of arteries it is good to fill up the place with fine cotton and place on dry bandages; and when you remove them, if you use medicine that causes blood to flow, and bandages, until they are well; and unless you have a cup of cautery present, or employ the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the blood is drawn out; and if you do not have this at hand, if you put on the place water from a cold spring as long as the blood stops, and then draw it out as it should; and that which is bloody and lighter in extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with a sharp knife on both sides, but let the cutting be well spread so that it lasts longer in heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives one must of space, and then when you have signed off the two lines, and you put on the hot metal as long as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two lines; and they are distant between the two joints because it is not souded of this fire instrument from all to all; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come down from the veins that are on the forehead of the shoulder, and it does not benefit from medicine that is done, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel or movement as if it were frostbitten; and if the oil is soft and moist so that the hair of the papers falls, and the papers are burned, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the ancient "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his hair or forehead; then he makes three cuts equally long along the forehead; and one of the cuts is like two fingers wide all the way down to the nose, and the others are two fingers wide at the top of the bones, and guard against cutting the arteries that are next to the bones at the top; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should have as much volume as three fingers joined together; and arrange a piece of sponge and many cloths for him to wipe out the blood, then pour the sputum out of both sides because this is its shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Once the incision that should be on the temple has been made all the way to the second incision; then peel off all the curd that is between the two cuts up to all the medicine that is on the bone, and do the same on the other side from the middle incision all the way to the other second; and then pour out this sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If water is added to the first cut of the instrument called “culteur,” and it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, it is this shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the edge of the cutting tool facing towards the carriage at the top, and make the edge soft towards the bone, and add water until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the hair that falls from the head at the base until the incision is continuous up to what opens at the top, and then likewise in the middle cut up to the other side; and then remove the hair evenly, and express the blood with ease; then put a piece of old cotton cloth in each cut, and put wet drapings made of wine and oil and vinegar over it, and let the abscesses not come out; and on the third day take away the bandage, and apply a lot of cold water, and then make a poultice of basilicum with oil and rosin, and other cures for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Dou reume des Eulz.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Now the hair comes out, and you see the hairs thick and small, and dulling the sight, and the paper is burned; and the hair falls off, and where it grows painful, the disease is worse; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from one vein only, but the medicine given to them, if it be such as I say, then it is right.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the disease to raise his forehead, and then make a large cut on his forehead, and another with a wide edge.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make an incision down to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves that move when you yawn; and when the bone is uncovered, so dip all the blood in a sponge, and then tie between the II lips of the cut and put cotton and linen there; then spread wet sheets in wine and oil, and keep away from an abscess; when it has been extracted, so you must treat with dried things, which cause chaps.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take II parts of flower of wheat, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and apply it to these wounds in order to stop the spread of the plague.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stumping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is chopped up in ears is one of the four things: or grain, or beast, or stone of small value, or similar thing as iron; or seed, as the sown seeds, beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and easily flowing and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is chopped up in the ear or any other kind of thing that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distil no little oil of violets or oil of sesame, but apply extraction; and when the stirring comes, it is to be stubbed with a nail, and put a patch of cloth or wool over the ear; and raise the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth of times comes well through this cure; and if it does not come well, he is instructed in the extraction of small needles, from which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes well with the needles, it is good; if not, he is instructed in the extraction of small needles, from which here is the form: If it does not come with the needles, he makes a hole in the ear with an iron file and a chief of the file or a notch in the ear very hard, and stops what is inside the ear with soft wax so that the blood does not enter with the file; then he shapes it well, for many times comes well as we have said; and if it does not come in any way, he takes glut of water to take the hairs, and puts in some instrument that is right for this, and puts a bit of cotton in; then he presses the glut on a stone or something, and shapes it well.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not come out of all these things that we have said, then you hurry to split the ear so that it cracks and spasms; and the way to make the split is that you first heal the patient from the head ache according to its virtue, then put the patient between your hands and turn the ear up, and split a little at the root of the ear into the fat where it depends; and let the split be as a moon, until you come to the stone, then split the bone according to your power, and suck it into your mouth; and heal until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is stuck and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle sputum according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and provide instructions for cutting the seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the seed is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have done this many times; then extract it gently with tweezers and with a needle, as we have said, so that the extractions are controlled.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Then, when he sneezes in the ear, the patient should use an instant treatment of water, and widely open the ear with a cotton swab.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be attentive to that ear where the sneeze is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it does not hurt, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it does not hurt, take several times the length of your finger from one side to the other and slightly heat it, and put it on the patient's ear, and slice across it from the other side, and again with another finger on the same ear; and do not stop doing this until the sneeze comes out completely, as we have said in the case of the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal's ear, if it is small like a flea or something similar, treat it as we have said in the section on division; but if it is a large ear so that you can feel it, then perform a gentle extraction with tweezers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the section on division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you should look at the ear in the light of the sun: if there are no worms, then extract them with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take a hair from where it is shaped.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And squeeze the little head repeatedly in the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, and then take it all out; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey by pulling the cotton thread as I said on the stone; and if they do not emerge strongly as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or a treatment of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, whereby here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if there is silver or gold, remove it from the small holes, and above them to distillate; and to press the distillation into the instrument of metal well made for this purpose, and if you see take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip facing forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the thread, and the thread be in the ear; then bottle it up in the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand temperately as long as the oil is distilled or the trickle of the ear; and let the smell of the medicine be inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated on the fire in this way that they are distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the sticking up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men because of an ear wound or a cart wheel inside the ear, and this piercing never comes out completely from the ear, if one cannot see it; and never does one hear a noise from it, and one sees it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes out completely, if one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, so does the work of all this spittle of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful and cut off the tip in front and behind completely, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the operation is a cart wheel or a spike inside the ear, so that it holds the little threads tightly, and loosen it lightly, until the whole cart wheel is bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ear wax is completely removed from the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it a little on fire, and then place the ear ring in.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if you feel the ear wax that the patient feels scratchy in their ear, pierce lightly and be careful not to hurt the grooves of the ear; then put a plug in the ear according to its width, and the moisture with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do it any day while the wound is still closed, or take a plug and moisten it with rose water and powder with vitriolic broth; and if you see the ear drain, be sure to take out the plug and put in another moist plug made of rose oil and wax, until the drainage stops; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if pain comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that calm the pain which are or treatings of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	And cut the roots of them when they are moist and dry, so that you spread them with pliers and tweezers, and put a little vitriol on their tips; then put it in the leach wine.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if not peeled, then cauterize with the small lens-shaped fire cautery, and cauterize again after incision has stopped bleeding; and often peel, so that nothing remains on their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	And many times come in papers things that seem gristle in shape and hardness, and because of this disease is called "grandine", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and so; the work is such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; cut the large part then, then scorch each part lightly, then pick it up with tweezers, and wrap it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the fracture is large, join it with a splint, and heal it until it is well; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment will soon restore it and hurt little.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the large fracture goes down towards the ear towards the top, invert the paper, and the fracture is at two points, and cover and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not harm anything; and when the fracture is covered, pour on it oil of salt water, and heal the site where it hurts until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is an ingredient that is used in paper rolls above, and this often happens to children of no one, and it hurts their eyes very much, and they have pus in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes; and so they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep, and their rolls are moist above them, which swell and change their appearance from the exinach that opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press down on the shoulder with your two hands and feel the escape between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to do this is so that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take the linen cloth, and set up a tent by making it into a circle according to the quantity of escape from each part, and then put it on him; and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the escape is gathered together within the circle; and then cut in the middle of the moisture at the spatumile with a sharp knife, making a split not larger than the wound at the opening of the vein; and cut the skin completely as you come to the escape; and in several dispositions the escape comes out of the split, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take all of the linen cloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as much as it will spread out; and be careful not to jerk in the split, that you do not come into contact with the spatumile all the way up to the oil, that you do not stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if he does not escape in the beginning of the injury of the split, then little by little split it until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the splint with water and put it on, and strain the bend.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind seeds and put them on to corrupt this moisture that is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the place of an abscess gets hot, then the healer compresses with poultices as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hairs grow instead of hair in nature, and are dried up, if they hurt the eyes and cause certain diseases as usual with the dry papers and the soft matter of them until it is a cause of the destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to four manners: either by fire cautery all together, or by medicine water according to what it is before, or by the chapter of cautery, and is done by incision and sewing, or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Il ковиет що ти покладеш лоу чиф ду малаїд у твоє здорове, потім поверни паперу олії до твого лівого боку; якщо вона перетворилася, це добре; якщо ні, то якщо ти виливаєш голку всередину всього дроту зверху; і будь це видалено з краю папери, де волосся народжуються від цих волосків, і тягніть дротик зверху до всієї папері, і поверни його до ріжучого інструменту; потім роби на стороні розриву паперу, видаляй волосся, а весь сироватяний матеріал, від великого кровотечі аж до малого; потім витягніть нитку, і покладіть паперу невелику кількість вовни та тканини, потім підписуй на папері фігуру обличчя, як паличка міркуватого, і, втім, потрібно, щоб фігура відповідала кількості, яку ви бачите підняту паперу, яка придумана для всіх.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if a piece of paper that has a large quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then stretch out all the spittle over the two lines you have marked, and begin with great tears until small ones; and let one of the splits be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the linseed into one of the two corners from which it comes, then scrape it off completely; then join the two lips to a seam of a needle to all the wool thread that is fine, and rinse the blood, and make the excess of the threads on the two sills for all sticky things, if you see that do this; and if not, so don't have care, then leave the seam and the threads until three days or four; then heal the wound without a seam with dry and restraining things, because the paper relaxes at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the seam is old (as the ancient said), and this is done without fear; and if in another way: it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the fuel of myrrh, as we have told, at three linseeds according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then take the one who is higher up, with small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take an needle or there is a thread, and bind it evenly according to the form which is here: And if you have no power to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle or there is a thread, and bind it evenly with a big loop, and another small one, and bring them together between your two hands evenly; and then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have tied it, so as to heal it; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then calm it with ceroside and similar soothing ointments; and never happens that the hair of the paper is turned: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li Papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it hesitates, if the cure is slow, then continue the cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the shape of the two claws that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute i fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l'un et l'autre subtilement, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse i autre fil subtil de soie brièvement, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c'est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l'aguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu le traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s'il en i a un ou deux ou trois ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is removed, it is treated and the hair does not come out with it; you will pull out the hair with all the thread that you have ordered, until the hair comes out from the pit of above and you see it by the vision of oil; then if you pull out the hair and the thread, and pour oil on it and leave it there for II days or III, until the hair is hard in its place and grows hair above; and if the hair is small, then accompany one long hair with natural chiavuls, and take them up with that which you leave, until they are stretched and then let them down.
de la porriture de l’oil	for the oil rot
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or "porridge in oil", comes about in oil, there are two ways to deal with it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from a wound, or from the scalpel, or from a cauterizer, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method for opening it is that you cut the seam, and separate the lips of him, and put linen threads inside, and let it heal until it is well; and it does not come that you use in his cure things that dry up and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and water or ale and flax seed are cooked, and olive oil is melted in any of them, and wrap a tent around him, and cure him from this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you keep yourself guarded so that it does not heal according to its previous form; and what we have said about preventing this disease from returning is that it will not return according to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the horse that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "ascratic", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident arises from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way to prevent it is that you should take an needle, in which there is a double thread, and pierce it through all the hair of the shoulder, so that the thread comes out at two places on the left side, so that the needle pierces the skin between the two points, and then tighten the thread around the bone, and tie a knot.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is convenient, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts on either side of the incision that you have made, and let the two pieces be assembled so that their shape is like the shape of a letter X; then remove this paper, according to the quantity that its edges are apart from each other, from the place where the paper was, then join the two parts together, and sew them with another thread; then give the patient the soft medicines that we have mentioned, and bandages, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de couture ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fente large en dehors des poils des papieres, et selon ce qui est ci-devant; puis dévoie entre les deux levres d'une tente, si comme j'ai dit; et il faut faire l'ouvraige selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les maîtres sages apparilleront engien de tout leur pouvoir comment il faice revenir la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade aussi, selon ce qu'il convient d'ouvraire et d'instruments em plusieurs dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Et si soudain de la papier
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si soudain de la papier
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	We know that the nail has two appearances: it is either nervose and resembling to hard sef, and another which is not nervose but resembles white congealed moisture, which when touched with iron and rubbed with pinches, it cannot move; and both appearances begin towards the great tear, and grow little by little until they blind all sight and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in a stance, then he opens the nails; and take the paper to your hand, then twist the nail with small twists, and lift it up; then take an awl, and I put there a hair of horse, or of mare, or of ox, and thread it strongly; and double the tip of the awl a little and pierce it all through the nail, and tie the nail to a thread and lift it up, and peel off at every little while the skin around the nail which follows the nail and silk to the hair at the top, then cut it with a fine blade and small strokes, and leave the character of nature or tears, so that by incision does not come the blood course usually; and never twine the nail in one place only, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin around the nail which follows the nail and silk to the hair at the top, then cut it with a fine blade and small strokes, and leave the character of nature or tears
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little bit of oil in the string, and from the colier made of lime, and leave until the next day; then heal him who needs it until he is well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not nervous, you cannot put in the needle, and the ungues do not go in, this image of nails with medicines is often cured; and they come out as I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, then work on the oil with the patient, and take a little spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail lightly, and if you see that it thins out, and the rawness hastens, then distil from your mouth into the oil colier made of lime and red colier and string, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again the other work according to this same way, until it is all osteid.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If any other thing is opposite to oil in the skin, as an abscess does, then the milk, and first treat the abscess while it is sound, then resume the work as before until it is sound.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the wound harms the oil by great damage, then suspend it continuously, and chop off a part of it rather than all at once, so that tears do not come out; then distil in the oil red clay which is made of white lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from flesh that grows on the pear tree
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	of some men has grown red flesh, and the prune is made and restrained on papers and turned to the back, and seems like a rose of basil; and the work is done so that the patient puts his head in oil, then works the flesh, and chop all the flesh at once with suitable hooks, and holds it firm; then chop the first flesh, and go on chopping little by little until the end, and be careful not to bleach the oil with the work; and let the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one oste the sebel, as the form shows after this chapter; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been chopped, then pour in the oil of castor or you distil red clay and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil cotton with care of wax, so that it is sure of an abscess; and if it delays nothing, and the hot one rises, and you doubt about hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure hot abscess with soothing medicines for hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way do all the flesh is fixed in oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But all the same it is necessary that you adjust the treatment for each individual according to natural way; and by accident, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that the members are suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	Let the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red, so that they are covered with oil, and tolerate its sight, and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	is therefore necessary that you look at the first one that you put oil on, in order to know whether it is dry or not, and there is no other disease than the hair; so then, in a certain way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, and then stop those that are wet completely according to his wisdom, and may be double subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two oils by degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	puis c'on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l'oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l'oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cet obraige a houre de midi avant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton obraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu auras ce fait, si distille en l'oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot manage to bind all of it in that hour, then make a paste on the oil from soothing things that relieve pain in the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and assuredly healed by the warm, then start again according to this method which has been described above until it is well; and this is the form of the binding:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The following is a line-by-line translation of the text: 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the jaw is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and darkness, if the mold has all the instrument of which this form is made; and is called "aspre chief", and should be made from fire a new beginning from I chief reont, and be pointed out so as a lime as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as you know that this corruption is removed; and do this once, then return the site to dry medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the jaw is sealed, and the bone is not renewed and does not open an abscess, and there are no other remedies than to bring back the fistula to the perforation according to this form: it is that you uncover the bone the second time by fire, and with medicines, and when it is uncovered take it so as to be at the chief three angles, and the stem be thinned until the chief as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone of a child's hand, and keep your hand away from the oil, then turn all the way back to the saw until it breaks through the bone and feels pain in the person whose hand he is holding; and when the medicines return to their dry state, as I have taught you, and the wood hardens and toughens its places, so the matter goes into the fingernail; and this is a lighter thing for the sick.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the escape of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs open up all over the body, and there is no danger of injuring the fingernail, nor any reduction, then you may lay the sick person down; then put leechcups on him where it does not hurt, then put oil on it made of poppy seed and aloe and incense and myrrh, and then strain the oil, and apply it to bands and cloths; and the way the cloths are arranged is that you squeeze the cloths enough to make them wet, and double each one four times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of hair they need; then strain the oil from above a hard band, and start again with the leechcups without hurting; then remove the leechcups and leave the oil strained day and night, and let it soften little by little, so you may strain it more; then remove the band after the day and night, and if you see the oil come back, it is good; if not, then start again with the plaster and the band and the leechcups until he is well.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The tearing of woven cloth.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then opening it up, and coming out like a paper thread so that it is hard to see; therefore, if you cover it over, the openings are such that you pierce an eyelet at the root of the part below until it comes out above, then pierce another eyelet where there is a double thread from the part of the loom; and let the first eyelet be placed according to the disposition; then tighten the double thread and wrap one end of the weave around it, and fasten it well, then pull out the eyelet and place it on another oil moistened with ointment; and leave it until the thread rubs against the weave, then treat the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound with a double woven circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have gained a good appearance, then pierce them with a thin spetumile that comes perfectly from oil, and draw out the moist albuginous and cut the hairs, and leave it for so long; then remove it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	with oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only oil that is gathered in oil, resembling water coming down, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you place the patient on a raised platform and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it as much as you see the oil come up above your hairs; then set it aside, and do not draw out or break the light, and observe the patient's reaction as if it were water; and if it does not come out, know that it is water, and the coming out of the oil from the hair is as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the sick person sit between your hands, then take the subtile spatumile and strike upon the cornee membrane with it by means of the continued connection with the cornee membrane and the crown, until the bowels come out; and when they are brought forth, let them be distilled into warm acute honeyed oil or acute oil or fenugreek is boiled and honey added, then let other remedies be used until they are healed.
des aigues de l’oil	with the water of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have made the shape of needles in the division, and that which is necessary to pierce; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the sick person sit between your hands away from light because of the sun, and tightly hold the oil, then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the hairs are on the left side, or in your left hand if the hairs are on the right side; then take it in your right hand, if the hairs are on the left side, and place the tip of the instrument at the crown by its thickness on a ray in that shiny membrane of oil at the part of the smaller tear, then pour the "almagda" instrument skillfully, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the shiny membrane of oil, and you will see that "almagda" comes to the hollow thing; and the measure of the path of "almagda" should be completely at the end of the space from the prunelet until the end of the blackness, and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the cornee membrane, and then put the instrument again at the level where the aigue is, then express one ray after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he faints now, then see the patient in front of him and the instrument on his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a little while, and then he gets up again, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly set in place and does not move, gently remove the alum little by little turning your hand slowly; and then put a bit of pure water there, and let it be from that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on one side the oily oil where or another moist thing in oil and a lot of water, and bind with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now then, and those who are of our sect, let us put on common broied with a lot of water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the alum cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have too hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so now the conjonction alone, and do not go too far in doing it perfectly, but make it thin, then pour oil, as we have said; and at the end of the work prepare for the patient the sleeping position before, since he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be careful of all movements, and press soft meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then take it off in that same house the most dark, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you tighten it because the blood rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	As the seventh day comes, you shall remove the ointment before the seventh day, and apply it to him who soothes the abscess; and when it has calmed down, take away the veil and put a patch on his cheek for at least one day, and stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and he will improve; and know that no doctor should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Israel, who told us that in their country it is said that a stone is produced from which water emerges, but I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor have I read about it in any books of the old ones; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, so that he who does not know them may see them; and they shall be of pure bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And may the head of the two of this very subtleness be, and behind three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the chest on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Now sometimes there are born or born various chards that seem to be scorpions at the base of the feet; and if there is any such one, it has a charcoal-colored head, and if it has a blue-colored head, it is a good thing.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Now in this case of the chards that are souef and not enchancreed, it is good that you should sit the patient between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the fine, subtle water from a spout on these chards, and firmly handle them; for thus shall you be able to sustain them in the bone-shaped structure.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if you open it with the fine, light, subtle instruments so that nothing remains; and if it rises up again or an abscess forms, if the wound heals as it should; and if it is a malignant abscess, then hurry and cauterize it until the wound has healed completely, and easily pour in and out or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the child is in pain, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healthy; and if the moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is a hard spot in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting: therefore you should put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and hold it tightly with your hands, and leave some space between each knot or less; and let the patient place the thread's end in his nose at his power, and draw it through his nose into his mouth; and many times do this for the child when he goes to school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the top which comes through the nose with one hand, and the other top which comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel them one after the other while holding us who are holding the thread;
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make this as long as you know that the new wine has corrupted that char, then treat the child, wash the blood, and moisten the child with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose right away as before; make this for three days or more, as long as the ointments corrode all who are delayed from char; and then put a plug of mud into the nose for some days until he is well, and if there is need for dried medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purify the head, where they distil oils and medicines from the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a plug, and conduct it also; and if you see, make a closed plug, and be the instrument flat to purify the head; and I always have at the head to hold it when they heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the neck from the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Several times at the base of the nose is a disease called "telul", which increases and becomes very large, so much so that it can be seen from afar; and for this it is necessary to cut it at the beginning, and to burn the whole bone, then apply the fire cautery or medicine to it; and if you delay in covering it as long as it is big, see if it is hard, of pale color, poor feeling: if not, do not touch it with iron because it is an abscess inflamed, for when you cover it once, much harm comes to the patient; and the abscess is by light touching, not by pale color, and you can see that he can cover it all, then empty the patient and cover him without fear, and cure the place with dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	what the eyes are cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is known that when a solution of continuance comes to one of these cartilage ovulations, it does so little, otherwise in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, whenever one of these cartillagines ovulations occurs, it does so little, otherwise in some men. It is necessary to cut and sew the eyes when the wound is fresh at all its blood; then join the two eyelids with a stitch, then cure until he is healthy; and if the eyelids are torn on one side or the other, you must peel all their skin as long as they heal, then join the two eyelids with a stitch, and tighten them, and powder on powder of dragon's blood, and incense burned; and put on the powders a piece of lead plaster of great or any other plaster at that time, and let it sit until it comes out by itself, then cure it with ointment until he is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to sew it up is this: or with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	A main hands avient within the lips an abscess hard, resembling grains of corn, smaller and greater; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each one with a knife, and bind it up in pinches and the cop it into each part; then employ the fire the place after the cutting of vitriol, as much as the sun is dried up; and then leave it thus, and cure the place of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times grow out on the gums a tooth that the old man calls "albulus"; if it is necessary that you support them with tweezers, and cover at their root, and let run the bow or the blood; then put there the fire of vitriol, or other powders restraining and drying up; and if this tooth grows out again after the cutting, and many times, if it is covered a second time, and cauterized: if it does not grow out again after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments to cover.
des sordens	of the orders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No order should be placed at the tip of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, ugly and rough scarabs that are; and no time should the tooth be black and yellow and decayed, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is stinky; so it is necessary that you put the sick person between your hands, and his teeth in your mouth, and extract the scarabs or teeth that appear, as long as there is nothing to delay; and thus do of black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are all gone; and if one is at the first rasion, it is good; if not, begin again on the second day and third, until you have all extracted; and know that teeth need different shapes of instruments to extract, according to what the work demonstrates, because the Razor which we use to extract the scarabs has other shapes than those with which we extract between the teeth; and these shapes should be ready for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure a toothache that you draw it out as soon as possible, for this should not be done at all; for this is a highly infectious substance from which there is no excuse to draw it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	And now when the patient is forced to extract it, you must be certain about the tooth that hurts.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain forces the patient to extract it, and he believes that it is a healthy tooth, and makes him extract the good tooth; and nevertheless the pain does not cease for this, until we have already tried to do this with these gentlemen; and when you are certain about the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you scratch the tooth well with your fingers or small tweezers at first and again, until it is well loosened, then you tighten the tweezers well; and let the patient's jaw be between your knees, and hold it firm so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take one of these tools and push it into each side lightly, and move it around as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the root is poked and wounded, it is necessary that you fill it with cloth where it hurts; and if it is carefully held with pliers, so that it does not break when it is extracted; and it is necessary to cut the gum very well around the tooth to remove it.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you should be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and let the patient feel more pain from the root than from the first one.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to do so as the ignorant physician does, who, because of his haste and arrogance, breaks the jaw with his hands, and does not administer anything except what we have mentioned; but he brings about great disease by the root because it stays, or because of the jaw that he breaks, just as we often want; and when the root is pulled out, if you wash the hole with wine or water and oil, and remove the skin without pain, so that sometimes when the root is broken, he applies vitriolic acid to it; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, so that the first molars do not move, are long and thick, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and well-made iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains moist when pulled, then you must put cotton and oil on the jaw or make a hole in it.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	while the roots are smooth, then the pliers that are called 'algefri' are put on it, for the head looks like a beak; and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must take off the whole tooth, and put the instrument that is called 'althali', that is a chisel; this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be either small and big so that it does not break, and the root jumps by this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the instruments, from which the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument that has two heads, from which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the rasion of teeth, and this instrument which seems a big pliers, whose is this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and this instrument is either such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtilly try themselves by themselves their instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, because there are several diseases where the old teacher does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the carriage or other bones, or it might fall, if he seeks the instruments that it is necessary, which I have told you, and helps himself with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be big and firm to hold the bone in place so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return the medicine to its place according to what is appropriate for him, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not seem to be in line with the natural shape of the jaw, and their form is ugly, and especially in young women, you must know that the root is below the tooth, and it is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then cut; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak, and made of iron taken from the top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits tight and tight by the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then take a file with this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aiguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu'il ne se déplace tant qu'il cheiece; puis la plaine en la fin à tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop tranchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l'aspreteit tant qu'il soit igalz, si qu'il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens...
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth loosen...
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the teeth of the blade to some pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not scratch the tongue; then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it falls or the teeth roll, so force with another wire; if it stays and will serve so all his time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the joining of the II healthy teeth, and the II teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then if the tooth falls, put it back in its place little by little, as we have said; and do not let anyone who is not skilled or suffer, and never make the shape of a tooth of a bone of a cow, and put it back in its place where it fails, and force it as we have said, and stay and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the tongue of the language
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is lost the tongue comes or nature, that you do not start it first; or by accident of a sore sore; and ovraiges are such that you open the mouth of the sick, and put his head in your own, and let the tongue; then cope the nerve of the large, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or no, and this is sudden from a wound, so you bite the hook and cope of the large, and keep that the cut do not become too perfect, for the artery which is in; and when you have done, lift the water rose and thus, or cold water, then put the tongue on a piece of linen; and soak it each night, that the leach not be able to dry.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood runs, then put vinegar on top; and if it doesn't go away, then cauterize with the slow cauldron, which is good for that; then treat with other treatments until he is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a dark or hard color, so that the patient doesn't feel it, then don't touch it, for it is cancer; and if it declines towards bleached, and there is moisture, then pour oncoïde on it, and make it with a thin spit, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if it runs, then put vinegar on top until it is dried up, then return to your opening as much as you can bear; then lift up the head from that place and from silk, and treat with other treatments until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	of the little throat boces which are called "godath", and they are properly called the II amandres, and when you cure them, if as we said in the division, and they are not cured, be careful: If it's an abscess of small size and light color, don't touch with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it's red and the root is large, don't touch with iron, also for the pain of blood; but let it rest until it's dull, and then take it off, because it would break on its own; and if it's a light-colored abscess, and the root is thin, get ready the instrument to cover it, but first make sure that the abscess is calm and not sore.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then you will place the patient in front of the sun, and his joints should be in good condition, and he opens his mouth and grasps the scalpel between his hands, and presses the tongue to all the instrument, so it is in a silver or golden blade as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Now you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the apothecary, if you take the onion and rub it with ambre, and move it strongly above your head; and do not move anything with it, then the cover is put on the instrument, so that there is a form of strength; nevertheless, the heads are curved, and one side towards another, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron of somewhere else:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you take the handle with pliers, so that there is a form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let them be cut on one side and not on the other; and when you have coped one of the ambers, if you do the same with the other in the same way, and afterwards the incision gargarises the patient with hot water, and cold and easily, and the blood goes away without coming, if you gargarise the patient with cooked pomegranate or oak apple juice, or mint leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then treat it so that he is healthy; and never let there be other abscesses in the throat than the two ambers, if they are coped in the same way as the two ambers.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicated a woman with an abscess that was lying within her throat, which is to say a small-sized abscess; and had I not very tightly closed up all of the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was stopped up, nor eat nor drink, she would have died if she had delayed it for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had risen two rain-cycles through the two apertures where the drainage was coming from.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I hastened then a little, and inserted the hook in one of the two apertures from which the drainage was coming, then lifted it up, and in one go of the hook took out a large portion; then refitted another in the other aperture where the drainage was coming from, and pressed the tongue; after that I inserted the hook into the abscesses, and poured some of it out, and so the conduit in the woman's throat was opened up again, and she began to drink clear water and then wine, and did not cease cutting away at the abscess for a long time; and the abscesses receded again, and filled back up the space that I had cleared out, until they were very large; then I cauterized them inside the throat: so it remained stationary without spreading; and I left those parts, and there was only God who took care of them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the blood runs down from the eye, and it is gone and far away, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the cheek abscess is smoothed out, and it is thin, then you should cut it; and if it is round and assembled and is not far away; and it is bloody or of a pink or black color, then you should avoid the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the eye disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, because of its blurring and distance, that you sit the patient in front of the sun, and press its language to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then cut the oncil into the eye, and turn it over, and cut with two instruments as I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you should not cover more than what is superfluous which is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it will grieve the voice and speech; and after incision, use that which we have said in the incision of the two mandrels, and heal until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has doubt about covering; then you must use fire cautery on the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of fire cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in your hand, and then press the tongue to the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and confound with sharp water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and employ the movement of this instrument, from which it has this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put a hair on the patient's head where you will apply the medicine, as with a spoon, and place the instrument that we have said or fire cautery on all the medicine on the vein; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and spittle run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat, and wound him; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the vein for half an hour, until you see it turn black and the medicine seem to be satisfied; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton on the back of the neck, so that the cotton dries; then do this often, until the cauterization is complete, and then leave it to dry, and rinse after three or four days. And if you need to reinforce the cauterization of the medicine, if it strengthens, and then after the cauterization cleanse with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, except for cauterization. If it is cured with smoking according to this way, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them in a pot, and pour water easily and make it boil; and the pot is well glued to strong ground, and place the instrument that chives according to this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be of silver or gold, and be the one that is bottle-shaped in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the vein through the tube until the vein is dead; after that begin often, until the vein dries up, and guard that you do not make it at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess hot, for many things happen then; and do not make it except at the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not available, then take a dog's tooth and put it in the mouth of the patient on one side of the cheek, so that the mouth does not become too hot; for the dog's tooth does not cause severe pain, and this remedy is good for all ills.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often times a bone or a fish spine, or nothing at all, comes up; so it is necessary that you should remove what you can see, and press the tongue towards the sun with the entire instrument, so that you can see the object; and if what is stuck does not come out with your efforts, it is necessary to make the patient vomit in such a way that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps, if he vomits, he will swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and you stick a thread into the sponge, and then make him swallow it; and when it reaches its place, if it comes out strongly, then pull hard; and if it does not come out with what we have said, then take an instrument of pitch according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can enter the throat more easily and raise the jaw; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest all of it come out, or push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, for this is where the trouble comes; if he swallows it, or he pulls it out far enough, equally far.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the fluid from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine will help you if it is not used as I have said in the division, for the cure of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the sick person under the sun, because you press the language to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the fluid, if you draw it out with a small hook or tiny claws that are worth nothing.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a knife, and put it in the throat of the patient, then blow on or cut with the blade, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is coughing up water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it swallow, and move it with his hand often; and if soon afterwards he feels the water in his throat, spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then smoke the patient with ashafetida, using the instrument I spoke of in the smoking of the uvula; do this many times, for it will not get stuck in the throat.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the smoking is such that you press it on the place where there are charcoal spots, and let the cover come down over it in the middle, and let the instrument come out through the hole; then pour your smoke onto it, and let the patient put the root of the knife in his mouth, and shut his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes up to the throat; and the throat will now be moistened, and if it does not spit, then begin the smoking again many times; and make the patient thirsty, and give him salty things and ale, and do not let him drink water; and then the treatment is that he should be taken by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument is like a screwdriver, if there is any blood, as long as one can see it, looks like screwdrivers bent to fit into the throat; and has a resemblance to a stethoscope, and has a roughness of lime, so that whatever it takes, it does not let go; and here is the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the scalpels for the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The mouth of an abscess is, according to what this reminder comes from a book or another in this book, and it varies in piercing and cutting; and it is in two ways, one of which is in its middle resemblance, and from that which he holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where they are twisted.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess at the top is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the twisted part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if at abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the bowels are dead according to their completeness; and if at such that it is necessary to pierce when they are healed, and do not die according to their completeness, as happens with an abscess in delicate joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come in delicate joints, and one lets them remain pus-filled inside, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is in a principal limb, and you delay perforating it as long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is in the foundation, then one should pierce it even though it has not been digested completely, so that it does not pus out entirely, and come to form a fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for piercing the abscess which is dead according to completion, and that is when the pain has eased, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the debate and sharpens of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where there is most dependency of the abscess, and where it opens muscles; and let the piercing be long of the neck, and the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and innards and arteries, and all its parts even where there is no plication.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bleed, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in the flesh, if it pricks let the piercing be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you piercing before that one, if you keep your body stretched out to him, and is plain of mud of dung; and perhaps harden the lips and him deepens from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to which the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in great abscesses, great perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such that are chewed with kur, and covered; when they have been well done as drapelets, and have become soft, so you make them as bubbles: and if there are some that are split in three angles, and if there are some whose cover has been done like a wallet, like an abscess of angers; and if there are some whose cover has been made into a circle, and other cuts and appearance of being covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the skin, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has a great boil, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the boil at once, but draw some part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw no more; do this many times in succession, as the boil comes out completely; but if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decayed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de veel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is a strong fever that arises from the opening, then administer cold water and do it quickly, and wet the cloth, and place it on the opening many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fever persists, then administer care and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is an arrow, and the base of the aposteme is sore and tender, let you put on tents and drapes wet with wine and oil warm; and if it is gangrenous, and the limb is fleshy, then let you put on drapes wet with water and oil, or with wine and oil cold for three days, as we have said; and then unloose the aposteme and wash it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is something that can only be understood by all when treating abscesses; but I told you before what to do before treating abscesses, and here is the potion.
des soros	sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or treat small sores, and they are handled by us so that they are in webs, also as the neck of a goose, and there are many resemblances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture as well as birds; and there are some that are hard and rocky at the cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you test all the instrument called "intramuscular", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and it goes up into the long leg.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, if you do not leave the hair that contains that moisture, for it returns to its place when you leave nothing; then dip in Egyptian ointment, if there is any; otherwise, in water and in oil, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and if it is delayed, treat it with fire.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the cotton has started to come off again on the second day, and the tar, as long as you know that it does not stay with the nail; then treat the wound with ointment at convenient intervals until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess persists without draining, if the wound is shaped like this, then the tar; and pour your vinegar on it, and scorch it on all sides, and put all your cure to work outside the skin where it lies; and if the artery is against you, do what I have told you later.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make an incision on the abscess if it is painful, and with a scalpel and a curette as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the abscess that is painful and moist, for it is lighter because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is none of these abscesses or the head that does not have moisture, and I struck those heads of an old woman; and I found the abscess as a heavy, sharp, and blistered stone, and it could not be broken; and if we had hit any of them, we would have made a wound as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, let those that come to the ears and roots of the children be opened completely at their most dependent place, so that the bow can be taken out; and cure them as needed.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times have they come with abscesses to the throat, and have removed the lumps, and have had boils, and never come to another place or sore, and are rotten, and infected one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every scrofula is properly within its rib, as the nodule and the abscess at the throat, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulae are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malign and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in that which you see of good disposition in the throat, and is the color of the flesh, silent on all sides and not deep; so that you must cut it from above, and scorch each part, and the two lips of the mouth together at one time, if you need it, as we have said in the case of abscesses in the throat; and little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor is it too deep so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to sew, put vitriolic acid on it, or some powder that clogs blood, and extract the wound; and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has healed, if you return to your work, until you have finished it; then examine your little finger for any small boils, if there are any, cut them and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the boil, it only needs that you cut this boil at its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it without hurting; then bind the wound with wet linen dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you catch the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, so that there is no delay because of its great size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and draw it out firmly, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have a excess, cut them open so that they die; and cut them in the same way as said before, depending on it, then patch them up carefully and with similar things, so that they corrode those who are delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well washed, cure it with ointment,
de squinance	squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	said and spoke about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw one in our land who did it, and it is the scriptural word of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have a squint, it is necessary that the flap of the throat which is called the "epiglottis" be removed; and one should not seek help from him, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are in those who have an abscess warm in the mouth or in the throat or in the two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the vein of the neck, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the strangulation which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it with III circles or IV a small incision through, between II circles or by the quantity of the incision of the windpipe, not in the cartilage; and if it is convenient to cut the epiglottis so that there is no blockage, and the vessel is long
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entirety, and splits the meat as far as it reaches the larynx; and avoids the vessels of blood, if you see no thing, and then applies the medicine as we have said; and demonstrates by the section of the vein of the larynx which bursts through the place that is torn, and because of the failure of the voice; and leaves the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed when one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with meat, and the whole cartilage is under the tongue; then administer medications that promote healing, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: 'Do not make this cut until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the failure causes him to lose his voice.'
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And so take care of the epiglottis lest the patient should not breathe, and thus it is kept from death; and because the elder commands that the wound be left open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then he commands to stitch up the wound and heal it, until it has healed; and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young lady take a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut off some of the chin; and I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and I knew well that she had not cut a vein or an artery; the blood came forth from the mouth because of the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was well; and there came to the damsel nothing but she became red in color, and returned after her condition; so I said that in the tailoring of the epiglottis there might be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	is called "hernia of the throat", and is a great abscess in color of a yolk, and is very common in women; and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no problem.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is according to two manners: of which one is resembling fat us, and the other manner is resembling an abscess that comes from us of the artery; and there is fear, and it does not deserve to work fire without that it be little, and prove and search in all the intruder: if you find it like this too, as we find fat, and cannot do anything, then cut it off, and treat it well, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to describe our condition, which I will now detail; and it is necessary that I make clear the distinction between us and the situation described.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and chills are present until the boiling has passed and the blisters have formed; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With our condition, there is no fever, chill, or pain, and it is cured by itself, which is of the same color as the flesh, and begins like a scar, and becomes thick; and are according to their appearances, whether they are dry, moist, or of a certain color, as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat our condition, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to their form or the paste that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to probe an abscess is that you squeeze or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has bitten the flesh, then let it be according to the size of the abscess; then remove the introducer, and take care not to jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if the current runs quickly, let it be colored, so that you do with it as I said of other abscesses; and if after the introducer comes no moisture, know that it is greasy, then do in a cross, and take it with pincers, and scrape it lightly from each side and guard the cloth or where it lies that you draw it healthy with oil; and if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it by pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d'aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d'autres cures tant qu'il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it does not stop at all, then we will return to you many times; and if it stops for a little while and does not cause you any harm, then employ the wound with some corrosive powders of vinegar, and extract the wound, and put something soothing on an abscess温柔，并用其他药物治疗，直到恢复健康。 如果我们遇到困难，就用二两半白醋冲洗伤口，然后保持湿润II-III天，直到伤口发黄，然后回去继续使用那种被 задерж的药。
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments that are inserted, and they are of 3 ways: large and medium and small; and there are 3 quarters that are called "albaret", and 1 that is called "breb", and there are also 3 ways: large, medium and small, to surround abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles with which one makes potions, and they are of bronze, or of yellow iron, or of silver, and move those who are yellow, and are more proven by black lead to surround the corbacles of fistula; and they are of 3 ways: large, medium and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the needles are of many appearances, as you see here: large, medium and small; and if there are needles that have 2 curlicues of 3 ways; and if there are needles that have 3 curlicues, and they are also of 3 ways; and if there are needles that have 2 curlicues, and needles of a single curlicue only, and they are of 3 ways; and all of them are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	The chief of these cuts are sharp, and some do not cut more than one side, from which we peel the skin so that we do not touch the vein or nerve; and these intrusions are placed in many ways, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and middle, as you see; and we use them only in the leathery part, as legs, arms, mammary glands, and arms, and similar things; and never do we make another instrument small, resembling blades, according to this form, so that we stop the blood:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No once do the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, as long as they look like woman's breasts; and remain ugly and swollen, and who wants to cure them, if it must be done according to this model of these lines . b . until . g .:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scald the fat, and apply medicine to the wound by charring it, then join the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and heal it until it is well; and if the breast drips down, and is swollen because of its greatness so that it looks like a woman's, if you make it in two ribs above, through II apparent clefts; where one should hold the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from these lines. b  . until lines g. then scald the skin which is between the two lips, and strip away the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it is well; and if it is not well, or the incision has not been made entirely, so that the sick person does not rest, or because of the discharge of blood, then you should fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it has soaked up the remnant and the fat, then heal it until it is well.
des apostemes des asselles	of the hips of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The pustules that come from the glutes are handled with care or they have ribs, and if there is only one that contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all of the bow that is in the pustule is empty, then employ cotton wool, and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healthy:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the pustule is like a wart, then cut it as we have said in cutting warts, and if there is bow in the wound, then apply fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses form and all come to the fledging vein and abscess; and if one knows about the artery, then the abscess should be long and perfect; and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel a pulling out; and when it is for the vein, then go away from here; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and most surely when it is tied up and at the angles and neck and mouth of others and is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the artery is cut and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses form and all come to the fledging vein and abscess; and if one knows about the artery, then the abscess should be long and perfect; and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel a pulling out; and when it is for the vein, then go away from here; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and most surely when it is tied up and at the angles and neck and mouth of others and is very great.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	as they come out in the artery and in the vein, they come out in the kidneys when they are wounded, or through too much toil, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens with the shoulder joints and the arms and in all their limbs, and it is a color similar to that of the body, and there are many dispositions without pain; and when it is stretched, if the patient feels pain and does not fit properly into the joint, then he must remain motionless: and he moves well on all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and the one who is in the shoulder or forehead makes the skin spasm.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, then the one who has it should tie it at its root; and if it is large, then it should be cut with an axe, and the bone and wound are then sutured together, and the cure continues until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of the large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Once in the bellies and nowhere else did the plague appear, and it is called "fungus" by appearance; and it is the subtle root, and the large chaps; and there are small and large ones; and I saw a man who had two bellies that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open, and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed one of them XVIII ounces in weight, and the other VI ζ., and in the incision I saw that the patient is moist all over, and the color of the artole is white and moist with a subtle root; if you cut it wide with the scalpel, and let the fire cautery be present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au tailier vient maintes fois trop grands déconforts de sanc, et se li sans te valant, si te hâte donc que tu l'appelles le cautériseur; et si tu vois le malade espoyant et poourieux de l’incision du fer, si prends-y un fil de plomber bien fait, et en li lie l’articul si com nous avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le resserre, et ne cesser d'extirper lou fil de plomber tant qu'il coapte l'articul, et chie par lui sens travail; et si les racines sont grosses, si a poour au coaper meismement pour le ventre, mais tu em peus bien coaper la moitier, puis le cautérise qu'il ne revienne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coaper le thelul qui est de fux color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess to which I will come in the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the breast is inflamed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the breast is inflamed by the cautery of an ulcer or a wound, and it appears on the abdomen and there are some boils, as in other ruptures, or of blood which comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind; and if it is through the wound of the syphus and through the outlet of the boil, so the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then there are many things, and when one presses it with his two hands, so that he repents, and then returns, and perhaps he is caught, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, then it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not restrain it; and if it is due to blood, let it out according to these signs of the large and hard apomes, and set it in place; and if it is due to wind, then it is cold at the chest, and the opening is that you observe its appearance for the wind, or for the blood of the artery, or for the vein.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is appropriate that you leave the healing.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you, or chapister apomes, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it is the intestine or the bile, then order the patient to tie his hair, and lie down flat, then sign all around the bile; then order him to move gently between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked with your whole hand, then extend the half of the apome on top of the whole scythe; then fasten it with a strong thread or a piece of strong silk firmly, and let it hang; then operate on the half of the apome extended over the string, and put your index finger there, and feel the intestine; if you find it stuck to the string, then release it, and bottle the intestine at the far end of the abdomen; and if you find the bile, take it to the scythe, and cut off the surplus; and if the artery or vein is against you, go inside, then come back to your work and take two needles, and bottle two threads, and bottle the two needles around what you have made a hole; then stretch the half of the apome over the needles, and if you find it, remove the needles, and leave the place as it is until it rot and die, and cut off the dead tissue by itself; or if you find it thin and rotten, then cure it according to what is appropriate, and cut off the apome as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what is appropriate, and weld the place.
dou chancre	Dou Chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Dou Chancre: We have spoken in the division of the appearance of chancres, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and we say that chancres arise from the mother's milk, and from the cuisse [leg], and from similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, then you must not come close to it, for I have never found one that was cured; nor has anyone ever cured one before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in its place and can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the disease of black bile; then make it well before it is manifestly full, then afire the disease with a good fire for the treatment; then pour your boiling water or salt over the disease, and shave it all over, leaving nothing; and let the blood run freely, and press hard on the place in your hand or on any object, and if the blood flow is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the wound is stopped; then treat it with other treatments until it is well.
de ydropisie	of droopsie
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	of dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	and be cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	So be cut in two parts. A point, and whatsoever it may be, that he cannot come to the intestine when put in place, and will not blister; then see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: you must then make a slit on the left side of the navel three times; and if it is for the bile, you must do it on the right side, and if it is for the mucous fluid, you must do it on the left side, so that the sick person lies on the slit that the excesses do not run to the weak leach; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and hold your hand on all the spatumil as in cutting when quantity of a thumb or more is put; then pierce the spatumil until the leach comes out, and carry it away, and pour the water into this instrument by which you get this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Et est semblant à une caine d'argent subtil, et est d'airain ou d'archut léger, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou coÏteit d'une part, III pertus; et II d'autre part, et I d'autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c'est li forme de l'incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And is similar to a silver nail, and is of brass or light copper, and has in the middle a small hole; and where it costs on one side, III holes; and II on another side, and I on another; and is the foot cut short as a quill, and this is the form of the incision which the scribes cut the quill:
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the disease, and you leave it wet, if the cure of the grave or the sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and tanned with alcohol; and the cure of drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stop of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born with an imperforate penis, or if it is perforate, it is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary that it should be perforate at all, very subtle skin should be used according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put on the piercing very thin skin of lamb, and bind it and keep it like this for III days or IIII, and when it wants to urinate, if it is closed, let it urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it will not be seen, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The hole of the piercing is opened with medicine made from clove oil, as we have said, if it widens.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the piercing in its natural place are scarred, because there is none who has the piercing at the base of the penis, so it cannot urinate unless it raises its penis; and it cannot penetrate by that which the matter cannot come until the testicles, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the work so is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are as large as the size of a feather, so that the piercing strikes in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the escape of blood, which comes many times, and if it happens, let the one who escapes blood, and cure the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the wart
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	There are many times when there is a warty growth in the area of the penis, and it has an ugly appearance; and there are both benign and malignant ones; so that you should squeeze them with a gentle touch, and then clean them thoroughly and put cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure them with ointment until they are well.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the wart is malignant, of a pale color and dripping, you must apply fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it off, and there is some of the wart inside the skin and some outside, you must first remove what is inside; and when it is dried up, take away what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, unless the head of the penis is not completely removed, so that there is blackness and corruption in its area and the prepuce; you must cut off everything that is black and rotten, then put on plaster made of honey and flour, which is prepared from the bark of pomegranates and dates, then treat it with other remedies until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood flows from the injury, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if blood flows from the injury, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: For the removal of blood, and corruption; And if the foreskin of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it is necessary that you tie or lead a piece of string from the tip of the penis, and let the patient urinate; And when the hair has grown at the head of the penis, which has not yet been circumcised, or there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape with the scalpel, until the ligaments are loosed, and the foreskin is freed from all sides; And if this is a hard thing to say, then scrape it with the scythe at the tip of the penis and the skin; Then separate them well, and put a thin linen cloth wet in cold water, so that it does not stick again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not a difficulty in continuous fashion if like the other wounds; nevertheless when we make this operation of our will, and especially on infants, it is necessary that we do it with great care, and with greater ease for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have it only because we have acquired it by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the most famous and wise men who performed circumcision around the navel, and with force, and altogether a novel thing; so that it is necessary to make it with care, because there are two openings, and by chance if one covers the other, it will delay it.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it happens that it is covered again, and the pain is doubled, and the cleaning which comes from the navel is not assured at the point of the member; and by chance if the nail escapes, it ruins the work, and often happens so that it is not necessary to clean, and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mouthwashing that is made so well on all the body of man I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, cut it equally on all sides; but let the thread be well twisted around the skin; and may the manner of the first working be so that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not bind the thread too tightly around the root, and then cause it to rest in all directions as you can; then let it rest between your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then bottle your hand to the root and blow or cure, and turn it upside down as much as the root of the root is; then wash it well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the knot of a double thread, then tie it away I from I another thread; and hold it in place with the second thread at the pouce and the little finger, and wrap it between the two threads, then take off the cure gently and turn the root; then let it run poc and poc, because it is the bleeding; and put powder on top of the powder I drapeil glueit of a good cake of eggs cooked in rose water, confit with oil of roses and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and the cure him with other cures until he is well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for purification if this is: the two shoulders should be soft and smooth, and also the shoulder blades should be long and even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake of purification if it is when the patient escapes from the incision; therefore, you should stretch it with your thumb, so that the leech makes an abscess; and make it even, and if you can't hold it with your thumb, put it in a vice, and then make it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If he transgresses three days, and the part that is dislocated is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess has healed, and then removes the skin slightly; if you can move it, and you guard against the part of the penis, it will not hurt him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the sore part of things with powder, which we have said about the treatment of powders, and if the cure goes too far, and it goes up, it will not harm anyone; treat it then, as we have said, as long as it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retentence of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	retentence of urine is due to stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowels, or horse's mane, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow, and you see the retentence for the stone that is at the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and let him place his feet on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he can lie down as much as he can; and then force the base of the bladder towards the extraction of the stone above, so that the urine flows; and if it does not flow, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must use an instrument called a “syringe”, which has this form: and let it be made of fine light silver, like the feathers of a swallow; and let the tube be a palm long and half, and let it be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for the discharge of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of a piece of wool or cotton, and bottle the head into the syringe; and cover the surplus of the wool and bottle it up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; and lightly bottle the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over the bottle; then bottle the syringe up to the bladder, and let the patient go until he reaches the empty thing, and if he does not do so according to this order except that he takes him or she goes there is tor; then untie the thread from all the tied wool, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and make the urine run. And start the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and the patient is comfortable.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the scorbut or blisters come to the bladder, and it is assembled together, and you see it distilling water and medicine, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has III perforations: II on one side, and I on the other, as you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine flows so that it stops well the vessel without addition, if one can draw the moisture, and pour when the need is; and when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the tube in the moisture, and pour while going; if you pour the moisture into the tube, and then rebound it strongly the going; if it will enter the moisture, and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clistere from which one clisters the bladder: it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d'un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenantment, tant que li malaides sente quecelle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n'as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d'oile et de moistor et d'aigue, et le lie en l'estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between stone in the head and all the signs, and in which stone one must work the size; and in the bladder and penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often comes out with children, and this is a sign that it jumps from the bladder like water because of its subtility; and I open it narrowly, and massage the patient's penis, and rub it many times, and then become hard; and it is rooted from its foundations; and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and great pain in the elderly, and intermediate pain between middle age and old age; and the cure of those who have a great stone is lighter than that of those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with a hot bath, in order to draw out all the pus that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he does not bother at any time to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and turn him upside down and move him so that the stone comes out at the bottom of the bladder, and never put it in place again; then make him sit with his hands between his legs, and his thighs turned upside down so that the bladder hangs downwards; then feel and touch inside; if you feel the stone in space, then hurry to cut on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out when you touch everything, then moisten your little finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is old, or make your thumb wet, if the patient is young and well-formed; then pour it into its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your thumb, press at the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your thumb, and pour it out where you can cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to squeeze the bladder in his hand, and he commands that he extends in his right hand the testicles up, and in his left hand he holds the skin which is before the testicles in the part where one makes the waist; then I pour the semen in a cup, for this is how it forms:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two sides should join the fundament, and let the size of the navel be wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps the press so that the one that is at the fundament does not work; and know that there is part of stone where it has angles and edges: it comes out easily; and if there is a part that is smooth, resembling a globe, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grand; et s'elle ne saute, si convient que tu extrazes sur les tenailles qui sont ainsi comme une lime au chef, pour muer extrquer la pierre si qu'elle n'échappe; ou tu boutte desoz li I instrument subtil corbé au chef; et s'tu ne le peux engigner ensi, si eslarge i poc lout pertus, et s'li sans décort, si l'extraction de vitriole; et s'il y a plus d'une pierre, si bout premier la plus grande au col de la vessie, puis cope sur, puis le trai fur, et les petites après s'il en y a plusors.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If the stone is large, it should be made into a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes out all at once because his bladder cannot hold it; but nevertheless you push hard to extract it, or to chip it out with chisels, piece by piece; and when you have finished your task, if you employ the wound with ointment of myrrh and aloe and dragon's blood, and bandage it, and put on a wet cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess, then unbind the patient from his collar after three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if the oil and water are very well separated, then the cure of the wound with astringent and balmy ointments until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and congealed blood in the bladder, and is retained by this that it does not jump with urine: then you must put something in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it out; then raise the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed; and it is right that all the urines that you cure him, that you tie his legs, and gather the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is placed in the verge, and lodged there, and the urine cannot come out; then you should cut it many times as I have said above, that you might free it from the size by this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron, forge it according to this form, and make it into three angulated pieces of iron rod.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take wire and bend it around the edge of a stone so that it cannot come out from behind; then tap the rod lightly with the hammer until it enters the stone; and turn the rod in your hand little by little, as far as you can drive it into the stone; soon enough there will be urine; then press your hand against what is behind the stone.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this in any way, then take a rod, bend it around the stone, and pull it out with force, taking care not to hurt yourself on the thread, and cleaning up the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat him until he is well.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is a good thing if the stone remains in women, and if it does not happen, then there is great grief, and it is defended by three things: one is that per chance the woman is virgin; and the second is that we cannot find a woman well knowing who dislodges to the mirth, even if she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that per chance we cannot find a well-knowing woman who dislodges to the mirth, even if she is married. And the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more completely by means of this: for we must make a deeper cut, and there is much fear with it. And if necessity requires it, then you should find a wise woman, and put her on, and if you do not find one, do not search for a married mirth, but rather a virgin; and in the presence of a wise woman in women's life, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do that which you command in the examination of the stone; and she should look very well whether she is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to put down her right foot or foundation, and press and urge her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she bleeds, then it is necessary that she move slowly from the entrance of the bladder to the outside, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle where the member is arranged, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her two legs above the stone or outside, and make the incision small first; then pull out the string in the incision as you feel the stone so acutely in the wound until the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the appearance [of the stone], then you will know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If it does not come out, place the vitriol on it and hold it for an hour until the stone is well-soaked; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have aids for yourself in your work by using the tools I told you about in extracting the stone from men; and if it does not come out, it is the artery that has been cut, then sprinkle the powder on the spot and drain blood and pus, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone behind, and do not extract it, for perhaps the patient will die; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire is gone from the wound, and the blood stands, if it returns to your work, as long as the stone is far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia in the lower abdomen
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramie aquous is nothing other than gathered moisture or white sapa, which is removed from the seed of the apple, and is called "sapa," and is never properly in the peel of the apple, if one thinks that it is another kind of apple; and this skin between the white sapa, as we have said; and such does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this Ramie is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and this substance spreads.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And this aquous ramie is of many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white, and such happens more often; and these are the signs of distemperation of this gathered thing, for if it is white sapa, as we have said, it is a long head, like an apple, and does not close the testicles, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then the abscess is reason with a part of the egg white, and because of this it is thought to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white yefac, then it smells bad; so that when you see to know the color of the moisture, then try all the insertive quarter, from which its form is above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, and what comes after the insertive quarter, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with fire, let the patient be healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and spreads out for him blankets; then he sits on his left side, and commands the minister that he sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs between the testicles and the long until the tip, and is your cut all straight while you are cutting the leather of the testicles a little here and there, and the scale smoothly according to the power; then pierce the white yefac with water at a large hole, and drain all the water, and then put on the scales, and raise the yefac upstream; and do not touch the testicles, but only the yefac; cut all or separately the same way the cost of him smoothly, that if you do not cut it well, the water will return; and if the egg was to your work, take it back to its place when you have finished the work of the yefac; then join the two testicles with a stitch, then heal it as you heal the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of the decomposition of blood; then copes the coion to all the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then cope the other part as you did with the first one equally, then wash the blood, and put on the wound another wet cloth in oil; and put far from each of the eggs another wet cloth in wine and oil, and put over the two eggs, and cover them with double drapings, and tie them all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	And take two drapings, and fill them with woollen cloth according to this form, and are assembled by sewing in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the shoulders prays on the foundation until the back, and the other to the part of the hand; and the other chief on the two arms, and is all assembled the restraining cord in the loop of the breeches; and is not once medicated this ramice of cautery in the form of a thin nail of iron, and is that you prays I cautery with a sharp edge, and pierce those syphons as one time, and scorch them with this sharp cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut it in all ways that you can, as long as you remove everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and keep away from the evaporation of blood, and keep away from the incision on the abscess, and other things, if anything opposes you, or an abscess, or the evaporation of blood, or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid and does not wait for this treatment because of its horror, then bring about a perforation, as I have said, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have spoken that the ramose water is there, then place the patient on a high seat; for the abscess in the part of the breast to all the sputum, and make the perforation long of the hole; and let the orifice be large, so that all the water runs out; then put cotton on the place, and tie it up, and leave it to run out the remaining water, then treat as much as the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydropic into it, so that it forms as before; and widen a little the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after VI months or more, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I know that in the section of this ring there are many fears, so I think it is better to leave it; and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the testicles.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say that many testicles come from the ring, and most of the time it is because of moisture.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This means: It is known that by acrid and bitter excess which spreads to the testicles, or by impact; and the color of the testicle depends on the color of the ring; and it does not cause pain, and the testicle hurts, and sometimes there is a pale and painful testicle, and its color changes, and never comes from an artery, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by an artery, if you know about the testicle's temperature by touching it with your hand; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l'expression dou touchement des deux, et puet on bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocation of the shoulder is due to moisture, and it cannot be fixed; the patient suffers great pain and injury. The treatment consists in resetting the joint, which can be done by applying a warm compress to the affected area. Once the joint has been reset, the patient must rest and avoid any further movement or activity that could cause further dislocation.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the dislocation is at the back of the shoulder, you must reset the entire joint and remove the cause, as we have already described.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are healed, then bandage the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a swollen appearance resembling a bump, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans severely when he moves; and the treatment for this disease is well afraid as much as this before, and we will tell you the work for him according to what the ancient did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you set the patient on a soft seat, then pour oil on the testicles with two fingers, all around the penis, and make them turn and spread out; then take a scalpel with a sharp edge on both sides of the vas deferens, as far as they are uncovered, and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then he puts a needle there with double thread, and ties it to the first place where the pulse is felt, and then ties it quickly to the other end; then he takes them correctly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and removes the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as you would for others or put on them a cloth, so that no vas leaks anything; because by this there will be no harm done, and all the vases will grow again, it is necessary to remove the testicles from all the vases; so that the oil does not cause the loss of fertility through the incision of the vases, and let them dry and not help each other.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphyl
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The symptoms of this rash may either be due to the section that occurs when a branch is cut, or to the extension on the belly in the part of the entrails, so that the intestines descend from that cut to one of the loins; and this cut is either due to a blow, or to a leap, or to a kick, or to a lift of grief, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the syphyl are that it happens little by little for a long time, and does not suddenly appear; and the appendages are even until almost completely there, so that the syphyl speeds up the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to a cut of the syphyl, that sudden pain appears, and the appendages appear different, as if they were going out of the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body away from the syphyl.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never let the intestines twist around the colon; otherwise it will be held back and cause great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of iron to remove fear, so that it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron to remove fear, so that it must be avoided. In this way, order the patient that he keep the intestines inside himself in the wound, if it can enter; then slice off the skin of the abdomen above the wound, all around it; then cut open the belly button, and take out the navel string, and wrap it up again, and tie it tightly with two knots; then cut open the navel string at the place where it comes out from under the skin of the abdomen, and cut off a small piece of skin, long enough to reach between the legs; then cut the skin of the abdomen above the navel, and take out the navel string, and wrap it up again, and tie it tightly with two knots; then slice off the skin of the abdomen below the navel, and cut the navel string there, and take it out; then take a needle with a strong thread made of twenty threads, and put it through the navel string in the place where it comes out from under the skin of the abdomen; then tie it tightly with two knots, leaving a long tail of the thread; then wind the thread around the navel string, and tie it tightly with two knots; then cut off the end of the navel string that is left hanging; then take wool dipped in oil, and put it on the wound, and cover it with the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it bleeds itself; and if it delays bleeding, so let it be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it bleeds; then cure the wound with other cure, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it is done so that the thread that binds together, in a way you tie the legs, after cutting them lightly on the side leg; then cut and heal the abscess of him who has operated, as long as the legs bleed; and heal it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes when there is a rupture in the belly, if it is as we have said, and open the orifices; and do not let any of the bowels come out into the tubes, and if they do, it is little, and put back every hour; and yet if he stays too long in this point, he believes that the wound or syphac [syphilis] will be there as much as the intestines come out; and what happens because of the extension of the syphac which is in the belly, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and swollen the orifices and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have before said; and never is cured with iron in this way: but that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then catch the place of the rupture of the large according to the quantity of III fingers; and then remove the syphac which is under the skin that follows, then take the ray and put it on the apparent place of the syphac; and press it perfectly to the belly, then cut the two apparent orifices of the syphac on the top of the ray, and cut them both; then remove the top of the ray, and do not cover the syphac or extend the egg [pustule] or anything else, if it is as I have told you in the cure of the rupture of the intestines; then cure by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you sew the wounds, if the wound is cured, do so until it has healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The wound-healer is necessary, and has no appearance in the laceration, and the fire-cauterization is damped at this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the cod
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the cod is softened in some men, because the hairs that are within are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when you cure him, to make a hole in his back, and to cut off the soft leather on the natural skin; then unite the two lips with one stitch or three firmly; then sew between the stitches, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For I know that chastisement is the use of our law, and for this reason it would please me that I not speak of it in this book; and only necessary for two reasons: one is that the mirrour should answer when questioned, and in cure of the mirror; and the other, because we have often needed to chasten certain beasts to help us, as goats and sheep and hares and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water until the hip is softened and still; then grip it with your hand, until it is set and no longer felt.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the size of the chastisement: it is necessary that you take the beast, and press the skin of the hips to your left hand, then hang the suspension, and tie on each oof a I oof, when you have well scorn them; and leave no poc of the syfac and subtle syfac which is over the vaselles; and this manner of chastisement is more than that done by attraction, because perhaps in the attraction nothing of the hips remains, so that the beast desires luxure; then cure the wound as long as it heals.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	is according to two ways like men: one is that between the two testicles open it as well as the shape of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in cort the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is in women, and on the head of the penis also as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of the man and the woman is that you make the joints together, and cure them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenticle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	is a twisted joint on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it as much as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you take the excess of the tentacle to your hand or hands, and cure it lightly; and do not cut it off too perfectly, so that blood does not run out, then treat with another treatment as long as it is healthy; and there is another joint that grows from the mouth of the mari (female genital), and employs it, and sometimes it jumps out, and resembles a cow's head, and for this reason they called it the "old cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said with the toxin, and heal it until it is well.
de erratique	de erratique
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is erratic when the nature of the woman is not yet perceived, or the hernia is small; and is given by nature at birth, or happens through disease that has come about; or it is by char (charm), or by subtle poison or spice, and is made perfect in marriage, or in coasting, or in sowing, or whatever; and its ability to conceive, give birth, and maybe flowers to grow; and the knowledge of this is by the route of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If it is close to appearing, if you want to know with your two hands or your right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is by subtle poison, and it is close to appearing in the book, if you hurry, and roll it over: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two fingers, as much as the subtle poison is rolled, and the cast is made; then take wool, and wet it with oil, and put it on the spot, and lie the woman on her back every day, so that he cannot hold it together.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the remedy is tough and thick, then you should chop the plant-like spaulding with a scythe.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the stinging is from a horse, then you should hang it on the line and chop it; and add medicines that stop the pain, like the one made from dragon's blood, incense, and amalthean ointment; then bring a large plier, so that the wound cannot close; and let it be for a long time, and bring a linen cloth; then treat with other remedies until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the mare becomes pregnant, if it is covered in this way, then an abscess will not form.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For if an abscess forms on the mare, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	are openings of veins that, without surgery, and when these hemorrhoids are old, they become thorny; and we have said in the section on surgery the signs and symptoms, and I will say here those that bring about healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are fully grown in the marrow, and do not appear to the touch unless it be by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marrow can be felt, they are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then tie the roots and cut it off at the roots, then powder it with restraining medicines, like blood of dragon and incense, and similar things; then pour water on its heels for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there is blood, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and so on, and make a poultice for her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if it doesn't stop, put vials on the back and don't hurt; then take another, and the moisture in apple juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, care for the wound until it is well; and what is called 'albachi' is red and resembles a sharp chief, then cover it as I said in The Book of Simple Medicine; and then care for it until it is well.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Various types of abscess can occur in the breast, such as syphilis, piercing abscess, herpes, écoulement, fistules, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I die in this treatise the chaut (hot) which comes to the mare (womb), who is not an aposteme that coils a bow; and if you know the power of iron, then consider that the apostemes are sharp at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, you should not hurry to pierce it, but let it die as long as the pain is relieved; and then put the patient on a chair, and have two small chairs or steps where she leans her legs apart from the leg; and let her feet be spread, and tie her braids tightly with a good knot; then suctions her breath toward her left coast, and introduce the instrument with which one works the mouth of the womb, after which comes the form; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you put the ring first in order to know the depth of the womb, so that what enters into the instrument does not come in more perfectly than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the womb with drapes, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it is necessary that he put the spout of the instrument on top, and darken the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess is opened and one hands it to the surgeon's knife, if it needs to be covered with meat, let him cover the chief and the stump; and when the bowels are empty, if you put wet tenticles into the wound with oil of roses or green dry oil; place the tenticle on top of the wound all the way down to the root, and place clean wet tenticles on the other side of the root in water or cooked onions; then let him continue the treatment for II days before cleaning with a mixture of water and honey, and then only with water or cooked roots and aristo log; then let him go back to treatment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has closed over the bone, you must not cook it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the chapter on wounds.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	For the art of childbirth, it is first necessary that she knows the natural shape of childbearing, and the signs are when you see the woman rush down, and yearns to smell the air: then the baby quickly comes out; so you know that these births are according to the natural shape, and the issue is with his head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to lightly press her belly, so that the baby comes soon; for when he comes out on his head, the second with him, and the married man washes away his superfluities by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it does not come once upon its feet, and comes from the neck or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or often, and is turned around by chance on his collar, and by other evil shapes; so is the art of childbirth that she be wise and subtle in these things, and warn herself of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If a child comes to term naturally, and the mother is in labor, and the virtue of her is weak, so that she sits on a stool or women hold her; and when oil or fenugreek has been cooked, then pour the bath between her two little sputums, whereof this is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If the second one is split, and the finger is held until the moisture that comes out runs away; and the belly of the woman is pricked until the child drops, and if it does not drop, then the woman should be cleansed with muskellaige of fenugreek with oil of sesame, then she should be pricked and shaken with condiment, and her mouth and nose are covered for an hour: now the child comes.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out first, then they should be gently pried again and again; and if they cannot get in, then the woman should be seated on a bench, and her feet should be raised up; then the bench should be taken off the ground, and the woman should be turned over, so that she does not stand up; and if her hands cannot get in, and the child is dead, then the hands are cut with the knife that has been put there before, and the child is pulled out, and it is even pried.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from delivery of the child between his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes down between his feet, then put him up again little by little until he is straight; and then stretch him little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can he jump just as his knees, then order him to bend, and make it shake with fear; if he jumps, let God be with you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump as we have said, then turn him little by little so that he is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is light-headed.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he does not come as we have said, then take muscillaige of alyssum, and oil of sizami, and melted gum, and grind them all together in a mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman inside and away this glue, then let her sit in warm water until she is warm everywhere; and when she has been soaked, then make her sit on a chair, then make her shake and squeeze her mouth and nose, and lightly massage her stomach, because the child is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child between her legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if I put my hand on her hands little by little; then she is bound to her neck, and her feet hang down, and she lies on her side; and she brings her hands little by little, and then she presses them against her belly, and pulls out her hair little by little, until she is fully delivered; and the child does not cry, if it takes its feet and moves them, then it moves its belly upwards, then I pour my hands; and I deliver the child little by little; and tell the woman to lean back as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the delivery of the child who comes with a wide hand hanging down one side at a time
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	If the hand does not come back, then I will make the woman get up and go; if she cannot go, then I will make her lie down on her side, and bring her legs together; then I will apply the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then I will make her sit down on a chair, and try to bring back the hand; and deliver the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and tell her to lean back as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	The child's delivery from his mother's womb, and he spread his hands wide, and turned his face toward her back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	The delivery of the child from his mother's womb, and he spread his hands wide, and turned his face toward her back. Let the balia take hold of his hand, then slowly and gently turn him over, and when he is right side up, put him on a soft bed; and tell him to stretch out; and when he has done so, let him lie down.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the second time
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When he comes this way a second time, if the moisture is gone, and if he is put back down on his face and neck, let him not be held back, for the child will die; then put the child back inside her, as long as you have done it right, and tell the woman to stretch out no more: then let her lie down lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born many times, and never three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an unusual thing, and do not live if they are separated by the fire which is used to make them; I know that those who are multiplied are different from others, who are made by a fire which is used to make them, which is used by a physician; and they do not always come into being naturally as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they are born with an odd number, if the cure is as we have said, and the doctor is subtle, and does it quickly and lightly; and do so in such a way that it can be easily saved.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Many children are sometimes formed in the womb I or II or III or IIII or V or VI or VII or more up to XV and all are formed into a shape of a child by the measure of the wise glorious, and know that the doctor can do all of this; so he does according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	In the case of a dead child or a woman who has given birth, as I have said in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are constrained to operate by hand; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound health, and there is no accident or fear of death for her; if she is bent over her back and her legs are lifted up, and the minister spreads oil on her from both sides, so that she may lie in bed and not be treated for the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils made with alfalfa and fenugrec and linseed, then grease the doctor's hands with these oils and muscates; then pour it lightly into the mouth of the woman, then wants to let go or hold on to her, so that the child descends from her head; then inserts the needles into her hair, or in her neck, or in her mouth, or in her belly button, or near her ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, he inserts or holds it at the cost, and it is necessary that he dyes the needle with his right hand, and puts the corbeur between his two hands with his left hand, and pours it lightly with all his hand, and inserts the needle into any of the places I have mentioned, as long as it comes out on the empty side; and this is the form of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then there is one other method, or if you need to do this operation, so that the extractions are even; and then make them even by moving them from one side to the other, so that they come out, and let the teeth of the ones hold them in place, like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if one part stops, then oil some of his two d'oil, and pour it in that part, and pull the other part; and if none of it stops, then put this oncine or higher up its place, and do so until all of it comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by stretching it, then you must wrap it in two sheets until it is all done; then cut it at the joint of the sole or the calf, and do the same to the other hand, and to the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et s'il est gros, et il est dans l'issue, ou il a une pointe aiguë assemblée, il convient que vous soufflez le spatumile épineux entre vos deux mains, et faites la pointe et tirez l'aiguille; ou tu le rends à l'instrument qui est appelé "almidach", de lequel la forme vient avec les instruments ou la chapestre qui est après cela; et ainsi aussi fais-le se frotter naturellement avec une pointe forte; puis tire fort les os aux tenaille, et si le chiès saute, il est extrait par force, si c'est fendu, jusqu'à ce que l'humidité qui est dans l'issue en sorte; et s'elle ne peut sortir, si tu la perces par morceaux à la molette que tu peux; et s'il est gonflé au ventre ou desos les côtés, il convient que vous le percez jusqu'à ce que la moiteur coure.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he falls on his feet, if it is a light atraction, and if we bring him to the mouth of the mare, it is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is turned on its stomach or on its legs, if you cover that which is under the drape wrapped around your hand; and cut the stomach or the legs, as long as the moisture that is there comes out; and if the other member is dislocated and remains in place, if he presses his hand onto the mare's mouth and pulls it out to her mouth; then he should stretch or twist him, and then he should pull him harder; and if the mare's mouth is shrunk by an abscess that has come to it, he should not work it, but rather prepare moist and fatty things; and he prepares them, and cuts them into water-softening and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if he is trapped on his chest, and you can make it even, then do as we have said in the case of a live child; and if one has no power, then cut him into pieces, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, then administer to him what we have said in the case of an abscess that comes out in the mare; and if it comes out with blood, then put it into water restraining it, and administer other cures.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had been killed, then consult another on that one, and it was killed again.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the wound began to swell and then it broke open and there was a great pus.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there put an arm, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for this man's belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound, and took out some bones, as long as the woman could bear it well; and after a while, a little of her back bone came off again, and I have not remembered this plaster before that, when the master tries an strange thing, he should know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the married woman back to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of the press, where we put the books; and at two turns are the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be thinner than the ring, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the fist should be large, and the edges of the branches I must, and a long palm and a half or a little more; and these two supports are joined to each other by a small piece, which is inserted into the mouth of the married woman in order to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are mounted high up, and multiple ones are required for the appearance; when you have prepared them, the work is more swift and taller than men because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair about the instrument unless you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is held back at birth, you must command the patient to retain her hair, and then let it out with care, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she faints because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, I can take hold of it, and make a pestle or lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the patient, as clove, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or poured in water over fire; then put one side or pestle over the pot, and the other head into the patient's mouth, and let it be until the vapors come out from the patient's mouth; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you do not let him get well soon.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If it does not get well soon after this treatment, and is not able to work as before, order her to soak her left hand in oil of thyme or muscatel wine and then put it back into nature, and then rub it; and when she has found where it hurts, if she presses and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the joints do not come off at the extraction; but you have to move it lightly from side to side, and then pull it; then it will come and will loosen.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the injured person is closed and tightly stretched, we have already described the treatment of sneezing and fumes of herbs; and if she does not do all that we have said, be sure to follow our instructions when you treat her; but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the injured person be tied to the lap of the woman, then wash him with ointment made of four-part tetrafarcion; then he will vomit and get better, but nevertheless, if this happens, when she vomits, a bad smell comes up from the stomach and head, and the patient blinks.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If one is appropriate, then smoke treatments are necessary; no old men have tried smoking with dandelion and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one smokes the woman to retain the flowers and the second is such:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a dog's head, and one puts the tip close to the skin, and the shoulders wide over the fire; and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan until it is spent, and begin again another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce through the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but a skilled surgeon pierces it with a needle; if one is appropriate at the bath that he pierces it to his right, and does not pierce it with a spud, and sews up the laceration so that it is not touched; then put on another moistened cloth in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, then place or pierce a hole with an awl, and let the hand remain extended, and be careful when he goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no return of sudden pain from a wound or abscess; if it comes to cover the sudden pain: if it is treated, as we have said before, with the awl.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistules that come from the fundament are a nodulation, and grow more than those that come from the fundament, or in the space between the two parties, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is ancient, if it opens, and then wet awl with white or subtle powder, and never does these fistules persist; and they are caused by what a person has in his interior or defecation or wind, when the patient has defecation, and sometimes in salt water.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they pricked until they reached the bladder, and only half of the penis; and came up to the juncture of the scrotum, and just below the navel.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so you see the length of the foreskin, and not its base; and that is when you stick your second finger or base, and you insert a fine needle made of silver or iron into the fistula as there may be no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twists, if you stick in a string of silver or a hair from a horse as far as your finger feels the string or hair on its tip; and if you don't feel it, there will be no piercing excretion or wind or sight as we have said: know that it does not pierce; but hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the conduit of urine, if it causes urine to flow, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just at the junction of the loin, so is the testicle brought forward; if there is no twisting and the pain does not radiate around, then it is already swollen, and should be treated with no medicine or quick remedy by rubbing; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	If it is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of health through surgery, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his hips, and his hips are bent towards his belly; then pour a bucket of rain, or a jug of water if there is twisting, until you know where the testicle comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in his foundation, then you should put your middle finger there, and immediately feel that the testicle has been pierced; and whether it is discovered or not between your finger and thumb, then know that it is persistent; if it does not work with medicine so that it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	On dist toutevoie c'on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c'on i fait, si est c'on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu'il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saisses que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d'oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d'oignement enjanrant char et soudant.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is done thus, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not, he is not cured; and if it pierces, and does not come out at the top of the tent, and there is a thick covering of char or medicine between it and the tent, and you see the fistula at the point where it comes into the covering at the bottom, cut off the part of the entrapment of the fistula, and bottle up before the tent, and then heat the cautery after, until it comes to the top of the tent; and let the tent come out, and go away; then take off those chards that seem like a feather of an owl, and there will be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you have a fever, and heat comes between you and the work, then fire cautery or an acrid medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery combines two things: the burning of these joints, and the drying out of blood and the removal of moisture; then he heals ten-day-old moist wounds, or dry ones that are stuck fast; until the bones ooze and the burnt joints in the ooze; then he heals wounds from melting wax that has burned the skin, and dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is reset, if it is well and does not return to its place.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the foundation itself, and is separated from the body, then it should be cut off or severed from the foundation, and this should be done.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and between them there is a thread or a sinew or joint, or it is ready to pierce, then there are three ways to deal with it: either cauterize it as we have said, or cut it short, or if you cannot do that, cut it off completely; and do not go too deep, so that you do not cover the foundation, and let the excretion come by nature's way; then heal, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you can remove the covering and clean it up after the joint has been cut off, or with another tool that is pointed; then remove the rotten wood that is in the wound, as long as you can; then study to restore the wound, and delay the fistula in the part from which the foundation has been removed: this is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no fistes according to this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is where it costs from the foundation of your leather on top, if take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour out water in two, and pour the tent into all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that which is pierced, so that you pour your two out at the foundation; and turn the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and pull them apart, and leave them one day or two; and do not restrain it again, as long as the thread holds these points that are between the two, and rub; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too perfectly enclosed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make the lacing shut too perfectly, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spud with thorns from which one makes a fistula is very sharp on one side and not at all on the other; and for this reason it is not good to make it shut completely, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: they either lie within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they draw a little blood, and so on; or else they lie outside the fundament, but have some moisture in them, and then draw a little blood, and they are red in color, and the cure for those who have them within the fundament is this: You must instruct the patient to strain them by putting them under pressure with the thumb, or with tweezers, and to cut them off at their roots; if they do not want to stay put because of the moisture, then twist them with a thread, or with a piece of cloth, or with a strip of calico; and then pull them out with your fingers, and cut them off, and apply hot powdery cauterizer, as described in the chapter on cauterizing; otherwise you can apply other treatments until they are well, and if the fundament does not want to come out, then use a hot clister to wash away what is within the fundament, so that it comes out freely; when the patient has strained them with his thumb or tweezers, and has cut them off, then apply the above-mentioned treatment until they are well, and after that, if there is an incision with iron, make the incision lightly.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch in this way: take a tortuous thread, and put it into a needle, and then wind the thread around itself at the top of the needle, and pierce the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, and if it is large; then pull out the thread smoothly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one for draining blood; then put a wet linen bandage in oil or wax on the foundation, and place it on the foundation, and order that the patient rest; and then leave him until he stops bleeding, and when he has stopped, he will be cured of injury and other cures until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Sometimes there is drying out at the end of the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you are to cut the bark from above a spit or your nail, which does not allow it to get wet; then heal it as long as it is sodden, just as it should be; and if it cannot be healed, start cutting again more fiercely than before, until it heals and is peeled; then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	The patient should let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	It is a small, hairy tumor under the skin, and it grows completely; and there is no pain in piercing it, and one can feel as if he were dead, and it spreads all over the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane from an goose feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that cane on the tumor, until the purple circle surrounds the tumor completely; then return your hand to the entire cane as many times as you can completely surround the tumor, and make it solid, and peel the tumor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make this of a dog's or a horse's or a pig's tooth according to this form, and be subtle and draw over it.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce him, for he must remain in two, and must be pressed; And if you see, then cauterize the pain, as it is before or with fire-chapistry of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of a clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No times is done clister of silver or of iron, or of melted bronze or of lead; and no times are done these instruments little and big, according to which they are taken.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These therefore that one introduces in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clister is little and big if it is above wide, or if the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say there is a distention where the belly is bound together, so that you see, and the ribs are pierced from within; and at one of the sides it is open, and on the other; and the belly is where one puts medicines from a bladder of sheep or parchment, and pierce all around the small openings, and put between each opening a thread of strong yarn twisted in X or twine; and assemble the belly as a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if it clings to the instrument before a strong thread, then use the cauldron; and this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or ambergris or some similar thing to the head of the cauldron, then pour it lightly; then the minister takes it with both hands together until it is completely full, then removes the cauldron, and puts the legs of the patient against the wall, and pours out the medicine as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night, then it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you bandage him with a plaster because of the decay of his belly, and the medicine comes out quickly, then wait until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or an abscess, then let the plaster be as thin as for a child; and this is the shape of the thin plaster so that the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds they are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things from which wounds are made are from the splattering of a stone, and the size of an axe or a knife or a lance or a club or a dart or similar objects; or those that are made according to the places of the body, so as a wound that hits the neck, or the head, or the breast, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stroke of stone or similar thing, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large, and you doubt much about an abscess: if you do this soon enough, there will be no need for a cerebral surgery, unless it is due to blood from the wound, and let the treatment go in the opposite direction to the affected part; and avoid giving the patient wine or fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	I say that if it does not heal, and its meat grows less, and do not drink wine, nor eat cheese; and put on the wound, if an abscess has come up, wet it with cotton dipped in oil or wine that causes constriction; and if there is no abscess, and the wound is fresh with all its blood, and is not moved by the wind, a powder that I will speak of a little later; and if it has been moved, put on some onions, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as of a sword-slayer and like it, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenderness, if they are brought together by sewing, as I say to the wounds of the belly, by the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And if the wound is exposed to the bone and it bleeds, and only holds for a little while with a bandage, then cure the wound with medicine, and restore its surface firmly in place instead of leather, and command that the patient eat large meats, such as roast beef and poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a putrid leather, and it is not touching the bone, if it puts on a little skin, and it boils fiercely, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, without binding it, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cauterize it, and if this does not help, then bind it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then is the cure light: and that you put this powder that hardens so that fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live clay three parts, and the powder finely, and apply to the wound, and presses together form, until it has fully healed and joined all its blood; and then bind it well, and leave it undissolved, unless it swells; for you do not stop the medicine until it is cured.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we use this clay alone, except that incense or dragon' s blood is not moved, but that fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fire has moved the wound, most surely it is moist, unless you put some of this powder on; but put on some digestible onions or flour made from water and honey until it dries up; then heal with other cures until it is cured.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract them with fine tweezers; and I will tell you hereafter about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	For if the wound is in the throat, and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but it hurts at the throat where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the throat, then there should be no other contrivance than to leave the cure, and not put anything restraining on it, for it hurts the throat and makes it retract; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the throat is cold, and its connection with the brain, which is the highest member, is by means of a string; but be so-and-so medicine, as hot water mixed with oil of roses, and let it also be washed with warm water, and other minerals according to this way, and moisten with oil.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that the scar is long, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and the flesh is thick and full of bowels, then the wound should be cut down to the bone, and if blood comes out, and there is a pulse, then cauterize it as described; and if the spitting from the throat is cut, or the mouth, and the wind is kept back, so that the meat goes well, if the spit is cut up high on the neck of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape; and then draw it forward, and leave it for a few days, and treat it with ointments that are thrown away until it is healed; and if the wound has pressed on the bone, then break it; and those that you cannot break, then leave them until the wound putsrefies and the issue comes out; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle it with powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has developed an abscess, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on abscesses.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe the patient closely from the wound to see if there is any wind moving in it: for thus you can know that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh throughout all its depth, then put on it powder at first, nor bind it with anything so as not to hurt it, but let it lie; but if you have no powder, then place in the wound wet cotton to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; and then you will see if there is any spasm or a bad quivering of the body, or any strange movements; and when you see these good signs, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the burns of tents and other cures as long as he is healthy; and if she cannot heal, and operate, then tie up that which has come to pass a fistula; if the cure as it should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then cure this one who is ahead; if it is large, sew it up; and if it is small, use powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has come off in pieces, then mend the wound, and the heavy extractions if they are dislocated; and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound run its course, so arrange for the extractions; and as for other wounds on other members, their judgments are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement dou ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Dou derrompement dou ventre is great and big and small; there is a grant wound which does not sometimes let the intestines escape or the ners of the intestines, so that the intrusion of air; and the costure is more difficult, and never less than the little wound that it has more than the big, for as much as one puts back the intestines more at a time than they are hot in hot; therefore the intestines swell often when they feel the cold, so we put them back more at a time, and because they are more suitable with the costure dou ventre, and I will say each and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestines forsed, and a difficult thing to set aright, this is done by one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, warm it gently in the third way: dip a sponge or thin cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in lukewarm squinch and saffron and spices, and stretch the intestines until they swell; and do not hold back, and let it rest that it may cool down.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, if you moisten the intestines with water or alcohol and herbs are cooked, for in this way the entrance is closed to a small thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small slit in the skin with the instrument where one copes the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to let it rest that it may heal, that we do not cut it unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting it: if you cut inside the corslet and leave it like that, and thus
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you return them to their natural place in their proper position, if you can do so, for that is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, if it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, let the head and the chest be raised higher than the lower parts, and in this way, administer what I have said regarding large and painful wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you should dress them, then put your hands on the wound, and let the blood come out from every part of it; and if the wound is deep, pierce its sides with a needle or more, according to the size of the wound, and leave a little space at each end; then tie a double knot at each end, and if necessary, cut off some skin from both ends to make room for the knot; then tie the wound up tightly, leaving no space between the knots; and the needles should be small and fine, because they can reach all parts of the wound, and the too large ones cannot enter well: therefore it is convenient that they are small; and do not put the needles too far from the edge of the wound or skin, so that they do not tear and open the wound before it is healed; then cut off the ends of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient while he sleeps, and put a cloth or blanket over the ends of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound has healed; and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because there is no need to stitch two pieces of skin together, as is done when sewing clothes; and if you have to stitch a large wound, it is necessary to use many needles and threads; and when you have pierced all the parts of the wound, take the needle that you started with to the part where you began, in the same way that one sews clothes; and leave a little space between each stitch, the size of a smaller thread; this stitch holds well, and I sewed a large wound on the abdomen, which had been cut by a knife, and was two hands wide, and the intestines were exposed for about two hands wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly; then I stitched it up tightly, leaving no space between the stitches; and I used very fine needles and thread, because there were many layers of skin and flesh to go through.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back his intestine when he had been out for 22 hours, and the wound was sewn up after 15 days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where they do not have any, and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two methods of sewing: take the needle and bott [or thread] from the outside end until it enters; when it has entered the flesh on the right side, so that the thread comes out at the other end, and the stitch is completed; this is how you sew like a furrier sews fur, and you leave one side of the wound open, and then close it again, until the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, properly performed by Galiens, is if it is like any fountain, which brings together the two parts naturally, and applies one of the heads to the other head in this way: thread an awl or needle near the end of one of the heads, and pierce that end only, leaving the two heads joined; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part all the way to the inside, to the two heads; then pierce both from the outside part all the way to the inside, in the other two heads that are on the other side. And this is the muddled method of sewing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens said this phrase and no one contradicts him, that when you sew the belly with two needles, or thread in each; and you must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the way of those who sew with a corroding needle; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the sewing is more painful than any other kind of abdominal縫合.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l'ait muee, si remet arer l'intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l'ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se tu n'as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu'ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k'il soit sanez.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will communicate with the principal members, then you should wet another light stuff in temperate oil or rose oil, and put it around the joints, and soak the tendons; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the bollocks, and often happens, if the clysters of black wine are taken, and more commonly, if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and pierce them from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is still attached to the womb, and this is because of the formation of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and its nearness to children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the nail grows out of the wound, put it back behind as well as the intestine while it is fresh; and if it has become old and black, you must find the place that is black, because there are veins and arteries; then take what is between the two nails, and hang them from the side of the wound all the way to the back in order to prevent extraction when the nail breaks, and the wound bleeds.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ripped and the wound is small, you can restore it in some places, for I have seen some honourable men navered or pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, and had both discharge and pain; I applied a cure according to what I could find, and did not cease to be careful until it was healed, and the holes were closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et when I saw him bind up, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and there was no pain, but stayed in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and none of the experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be tied up in some way: take thin straws from big testicles, then join the lips of the wound, and when the straws have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it extrudes its mouth; and then he takes hold of the head, and this remains so that he cannot release it, and then puts another straw after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and let the wound heal.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief becomes inflamed in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and can be tied up with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in some way: take the chief of this thread that is completely severed, and then tie it to the chief of this thread with a very fine twine, and then wind the thread around the needle, and cut the intestine, and sew it back together; and this method of sewing straws is only as good as the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no health or cure without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from fistula or which it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that all wound or abscess, when it heals, is called "fistula" in general, and most so when it is scarred and turns into a bowl.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the verdant dedication of hard and white nodulation, where there is no pain, and it is also scarred like a hen's feather; and never clear bowels, and sometimes thick, sometimes thin; neither is it, and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that all wound which is not healed, and there is no cure, this is not but by one of VIII causes: that is to say, by smallness of blood or corruption; or for its malice; or because there is something hard inside, and on the lips, which does not allow it to be born; or because there is too much bowel; or because the lees are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the cure; or because what corruption is according to pestilence; or because by nature digestion is late, and health is late, and retreats by nature; or because there are veins or bones. And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or covient that I do make you know the cure of fistula which is made by oevre of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula may come in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the kidney, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to part that comes to the principle of the member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of great treatment, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the part that I have said, and you have engaged to cure it, and you have seen it clearly, then take a tent of iron or of metal, if the fistula is straight, look at it; and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a slight tent of plies, for the plies bend around the curvature; and if the fistula has broken hands and you cannot find it well with tents, then cleanse it thoroughly with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is completely cured, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the location where he feels it; and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the locations that I have told you, then cure it according to what I have said, and remove the false tissue and the rotten plies that are inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right place, it is necessary that you cure it completely, as much as you can, then put moist tents in medicine water, and pour them on the top of the fistula until the medicine corroded the excess that was reserved at the bottom; and then put oilmens in a melting oil, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cure it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein in your neck gets injured or your principal members get injured, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and bruising, let the king treat it with poultices until it is healed; and if it is not healed, rent it back as before, knowing that you have not yet reached the end: if you uncover and examine until you are at the bottom, then restore the joint; and if it is healed there, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If that does not work, know that the corruption is too profound, so you cannot come there; if there is no other problem than letting nature take its course; and if there is one small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with the right tool for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, one by one; and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, then cut and moisture and warm it, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something that will cause putrefaction, and let it remain as long as the pus is between the bones, and thereafter the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, so wait for the corruption to become black throughout the bone, then patch up the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption and it has reached the root of the bone, so that it needs to be cut away completely, then mend it with cotton until the bone is healed. And I will tell you of an ulcer that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and grew a large abscess, and had no apparent cause for opening; but by their folly they caused it to grow so much that the abscess opened, and corrupted much matter, and became a fistula, and it came to be so bad that all his bones were wet with sweat and moisture from the body; and many times he was cured within two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines they used to cure him, and what ran through the fistula caused great color changes in his body; and his body became red in places, and had a yellowish hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I fixed a tent in one of those holes, and then searched all the holes, and I found that one came out against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried then, and fixed in one of the holes as much as I could discover a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and pierced, and came out corruption to the bone inside; I knew what appeared to me of the bone rotten, and I took care that there was no other corruption, except that which I had; and I began to restore the wound with medicines against long time, and could not be bonded; and then I began again, and discovered the bone so as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I knew it, and then I took it, and leaned over to bond the place; but I could not fix until I fixed within a palm of the bone, and turned it entirely, then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and bonded tightly, and did not come again to unbind the wound except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear, and for the fear of death which I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car for the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was healed entirely, and gave birth in place of the bone a hard child, and was of good temper and did not have any harm or opposite from all in all, nor air nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the backbone, then it is necessary to be done in this way: take a piece of rope, and pull it to the head of the bone which has been opened, and order that he not extend it upward; and put another piece of rope, larger than the first, on the head of the bone, and tie it to the hard child which is over the bone, and turn the head, so that you take out the hard child from below, and uncover the head where you see or feel the corruption, so that the corruption does not damage the child; and put a flame or a heated piece of metal over the bone to cover the corruption. And it is necessary to be done as often as one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is rotten and will not open, and the rot is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the whole char; then put on it an ash twig, and then thread the corruption from one side to the other, and let the thread come out at the long end of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the rotten joint, and thread the bone where it is on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other pain but that of the cover; and if the corruption is at the hand's grip or at the foot's grip, then this is a very bad thing, nevertheless you should question this corruption, how it opens; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not do you harm; and know that the incisors and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to adapt each instrument to each appearance of work, and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so think about the instrument of which you will have need according to what suits you.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	In case of inflammation or injury; and when you have applied the medicine for corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, cover that member up to the point where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death due to the malice, which is greater, of the defect of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, or seem to be burnt by fire, and the corrosion moves from member to member, taking hold throughout the body; if you hurry to cover it, and if it is due to the impact of certain venomous animals, such as scorpions of the sea and adders and similar things, cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes up to the arm, cover it at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and do this whenever the corrosion comes or hurts: if it comes to the first joint, cover it after the other joint; and if it comes or hurts at the foot, cover all the foot; and if it rises in the leg, cover it at the knee joint; and if it comes up above the knee, there is no other remedy except to put the sick person to death; and the way of covering or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister the thread from one side, and another minister the thread from the other side, and loose the cloth which is between the threads at the wide spud, as much as the bone is uncovered; then cover or sew, and put a linen drape on each part, so that the thread does not touch the healthy part, and cause the patient more pain and infection by the stitch.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the pain comes while you are working, then cauterize the site thoroughly, or put some powder restraints on it; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it is well; and I will tell you what happened at home in short: he got a blackness that looked like fire had burned it, and this corrosion came first in its due place from the foot, so much that it stained all the foot; and when the honor saw the corrosion, then it covered the foot with a layer of copper, and was healed; and a long time later the corrosion returned to its place on the palm of the hand, and came to me, and I put things that reflect after purification of the body, and could not stop the corrosion; and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to, that I had hope of impacting the matter; and I also doubted that if I would cut off his hand, that he would not die, because the virtues of man were weak; and he became completely desperate, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with a layer of copper, and was healed; and I only knew how to do this for another one, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No one should come to an abscess in the flesh, and delay for so long that it forms a large ball of pus; and then burst and escape, and remain inside as our servants do; and the skin that is above it is also thin like a flag, and does not run to the bone or nerves, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it has become so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin should be cut from all around, and most especially when it is thin like a flag; and does not heal for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have promised that the skin will heal, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like a carpet, then treat it with Egyptian medicine made like this: take oil, and chalk, and equal amounts, and put the medicine in a vessel and heat it on the fire until the medicine turns red, and also becomes thicker than honey; and then take some of this according to your need, and make an emulsion with water and honey, and clisterize the breast, and extract the pus; and leave the medicine there for two hours, and then remove it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is completely cured, and the pus is gone; and you should never clisterize with only water of ashes when this medicine is not present, but you should squeeze ashes from a vine stalk, and pour water on them, and then clisterize it, until you know that the breast is well cured; and if the patient cannot bear the pain, nor can the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes be used, then clisterize it with honey and wine which has been made sweet, that the honey has the property to cure and wash away, and the wine makes the disease better; and when you have done this, and know that the breast is completely cured, if the pus comes from the clistere that has been made, and is that you squeeze green ointment, and make it with oil of roses and wine; or you clisterize it with certain medicines and oils, of which I have spoken in the treatise on oils; and if the breach in the breast is small, and the tube for the clistere cannot enter, then widen it a little with iron, and put an envelop of the Egyptian oil, or basilicon oil, until it has widened enough; and if the wound is too wide, so that the clistere cannot enter, and if the breach from which the pus comes is above or below, then cut or raise it higher than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in perfect health, they should not be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the navel as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the bowels move downward as much as possible, for when the bowels are in perfect health, they should not be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the navel as you wish, prepare it in such a way: that the bowels move easily downward, leaving nothing of the bowel behind; and take medicines to strengthen it over the navel, and wrap them in linen cloths that cover all the navel; then apply the forceps to the navel on one side as widely as possible from the first, for the ligature is tied on another cloth according to the quantity of the navel hole, and placed on the navel hole to support the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once; and the one who is on the navel hole should often be removed to take off the bowel, and know what runs from the bowel, whether it is poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested; and take care that the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not, and how long the medicine has been extended in such a way, and you see the nature that rises on the navel hole, know that the breasts have already started to move, and approach them; and then remove it in the morning, or third day, and when you remove the wound, if you change another cloth, and renew the ligature.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become sore and swollen after many days, know that her breasts do not ache.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long after a while, but you don't despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some people whose breasts become sore and swollen after a long time, but their breasts do not ache; and if the breasts become late in healing, and are inflamed, know that this is due to a poison running into the breasts and causing inflammation; and if the breasts are swollen with pain after many days, know that the breasts do not ache; and if the healing of the breasts is delayed and is inflamed, then use the following medicine: take an initial batch of strong vinegar and add water to it and boil it; then use oil and rosewater and equal parts of vinery in a pan; then roast and blend it into powder; and add honey; and then use this mixture: make a paste from honey, mirre, and aloes, and add incense and rosin, and grind it, and then spread it on the breast; and never give it to drink as an aliment; but if you want to use herbs or compounds, grind them, and make powder of them, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if this cure is long in healing, know that corruption has taken hold, and causes pain and inflammation in the bones, or in the limbs; so if one uses this cure for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toe of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A bunion is a scar that grows out of the joint of the finger, or foot, or perhaps in another two places; and when it is irritated, and no attention is paid, then it comes to be a bunion that hurts and stings so much as to cause the root of the finger to become sore, and perhaps even the whole thing, and comes to have an ulceration reaching to the bone, so much as to cause a painful smell, and has two large joints, and is of a reddish color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not take, then you must take away all the surplus that has been stored up under the finger nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is sound and the finger nail is healthy; and if the nail presses upon the flesh, and causes it to ache, then you must take away the root of the nail that presses, cutting it off sharply and lightly, and putting on top of the remnant of the nail burning and corrosive medicines in order to remove everything; then treat with salves as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corrosion est dans l'os, alors le coupe et traîne-le, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois que la corruption s'étend, alors soigne-le jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse ; et s'il est blessé et douloureux, et sent une grande douleur, alors il faut le guérir en premier ; puis coupe l'ongle avec un couteau en coupant travers, et garde que la lame ne touche pas la chair qui est à côté de l'ongle, car le malade ressentirait trop de douleur ; et s'il arrive, alors met quelque chose pour apaiser.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	la douleur du cœur de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Les deux membres qui naissent dans les mains de certains hommes sont parfois charnus, et parfois osseux, et n'ont jamais d'ongles, et aucune racine de la jointure ne nait en aucun d'eux.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se mute; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil who is born in the root of the joint if it is difficult to treat: if you hold him by the cup.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born in the heart of the joint, if it is right that you cut the rounded part up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come together by nature at birth, or by the assembly of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you consider that you should cut the joint that is joined together by its natural forms; then place between two tents or drapes wet with oil rosin, so that it does not join together; or place between two pieces of fine cloth, until the joints are joined together as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Se soudemens comes to any of its two with the palm, so hold it firm as it should be.
des vils	of
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And the vile vis are large wrapped full of superfluous melancholy that come in many limbs of the body; and there comes in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you must not at any time administer a laxative to him, but cure him from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure for iron is done according to two ways: one is that you cut it off, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you leave the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size should be according to this way: raise the first leg of the warm water very well, until the large blood is thin, and then draw out the leg of the sick from above the knee down to the ankle; then cut the vein in one, two, or three places, then draw out and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one side chief to the other, as much as the virtue of the sick can bear; and then lie down, and order that he dye his meat by drinking black drink; and then begin the evacuation and the cure when the veins are empty, and rest on the sick.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The following is the translation of the text:
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is twisted and contorted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you should tear it crookedly, but do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And if it is twisted and contorted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you should tear it crookedly, but do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before. The shape of the iron that one covers the vis with if it is curved, and does not cut, so that he covers the vein; and it is of large curve, because if it were thin, he would cover the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and perhaps it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and such a thing happens that comes from the skin that comes from within the body winding itself and crawling, wound between skin and shield.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the shape of it changes, and the wound begins to come out, just as the root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	If the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot be reset, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at no time to this vein cut the hand, and least when it opens in the joint of the foot or where the foot is, and from there comes a great harm, and from which it often rains; then heal him as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which are born between leather and horse
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff disease," for it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that borns between leather and cart, and goes up and down all over the body, causing pain at each member it touches, so that it comes off the skin where it has gone; and it is infected with pus, as if worms and scorpions and lice had entered into it; and one wonders about its malice, because when it goes through the body, and comes to the head, it goes to the oil, maybe by chance, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you treat and draw it out, if you can only do so when he is: then first lie the joint on top of and tie it with a strong and very tight bandage, then lift up and draw out forcefully, and let it fall completely into the cart, and don't true it, but cauterize it with fire until he dies; and the greatest harm that he does, if he corrupts the oil as we have said; and if you see him coming with his head near the oil, then strain it out completely, then lift up and draw forcefully; and it is convenient to use the patient for purification of the corsages of soluble medicines for the bad humors putrid, and sear himself with meat that is rotten.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen this one that I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to treat a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and I saw a little swelling in the vein of her arm; and then after, I saw it rise up as if it were a worm in her shoulder, faster than anything else, like quicksilver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain left that place, and went into her shoulder, and then soon afterward corrupted all her body, until she came back to the other arm; then she told me that she was turning her body again around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how she moved from member to member, because I had never seen this disease move in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Anyway, I had heard many times that people with this disease sometimes feel pain in one place and then another, but I had never seen it. I thought that was because the woman's body was stiff and her veins were exposed; and because that swelling appeared suddenly, like a constriction; and I didn't see it fit for those who have stiff bodies and moist veins to be exposed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens like we have said, let it lie down and get better; and then bandage it tightly so that the wound does not move; and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see blood in your urine, let it be cured with pills made of rotten eggs, and serapin, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of their entry into the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	are of various shapes, for they have sharp or small or curvy or thick points; and some are two-edged, and some have tongues, and some pieces; and it poins in one member in a different way: or it poins in principal members, like the brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she dies, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you wash yourself of this arrow extraction, for death comes after many preparations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, take it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and the medicine that is above the skull, is when there is a scald and a fever and a scorching in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it does not come out through the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and if this sign appears to you, you must treat it, and draw out the arrow if it is stuck.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou quam, sont qu'elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s'elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the snot when it comes out is that without a plume of foam jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gazes upward and shivers with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the snot comes out in the covering of the foot, it is with great pain and great pain and sighing; and all the members move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the snot comes out in the stomach, perhaps some meat is vomited up.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow is lodged in the belly, and it does not come out through the intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow is lodged in the bladder, and it does not come out with urine, causing the patient to urinate frequently and feel great pain, know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the ajutoire and the spine and the force and the cul and the legs, and the limb that seems to be affected, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not come out, then as I will tell you what happened to me, do the opposite.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow struck him in the jaw at the root of the nose: I tried to extract it, and I pushed it out from the other side with the help of a finger, and he was healed without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And throw in a quiver that the arrow falls into the oil grease of the paper dry, and the quiver was recovered, and there could be reached only the tip to the wood, and it was the quiver great of a Turkish arch, all I light without ears; The game was healthy, and no accidents came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And throw a quiver from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabian quiver with ears; I knew the barbarians, and I waited until I threw it, and the Christians were healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And throw a quiver at home, which was knee or belly, and I thought he died; and then it passed XXX days, so his disposition did not change; I cut on the quiver, and engaged it, and threw it, and had no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is closed above; and hold the arrow within, and do not disturb its natural order, nor find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was closed above; and held it so that he suffered great pain; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a king's son who had an arrow in his lung, and it was a little傾向右邊，箭頭深埋在內；箭頭深陷在內，我被召來治療，三天后他去世了。
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it with my finger and felt nothing; he felt no pain or tingling in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow; I put it on top of the plaster of the stomach because its legs don't swell; and I saw the legs of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for three days, and resolved the wound right away, and held him back a long time, so that he felt the arrow tip inside his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put the corrosive medicine on the wound for three days, trying it and feeling the tip of the arrow which was getting harder at its place; then I applied that medicine to the opening of the wound until the shape of the arrow became clear to me; and I waited three months, and then the wound opened so much that I had to use tweezers to pick it, pulling it from one side to the other, and I couldn't get it out; so I didn't stop from trying and inventing ways of instruments until I picked it with well-made tweezers, according to its shape which came out at the end of this chapter, till I put it back in place, and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; but I restored it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Have you spoken about the quality of extraction of certain arrows, so that you place your cure on what I have not said, for the book cannot take all; but the master surgeons compare very little thing, and on what is present and failing, try nine operations, and nine instruments, in the dismemberment of strange things which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are not in the members unless they go through two ways: either by the place where they enter or by another part; and that which goes through one way is an arrow penetrating into its flesh, and never enters any more.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it no longer comes out, if you leave the flesh decay until it is rotten inside, and also if it is stuck in the bone, and it can't come out, if you wait a few days and then extract it; and then it comes out, and if it doesn't come out, if you pierce the flesh with a very fine thing all around, until the inner flesh is stretched, and then you pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes all the way to one of the lungs of the skull, and some of the accidents that I said may happen to the patient: do not remove it, but leave it as long as it remains even after a few days, for if the arrow comes out too soon, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone but comes only up to the sinus, and the patient remains for a few days without any bad accidents, then the device for removing it can be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deeply lodged and cannot come out, then I will give you advice on how to deal with it, as I told you; then treat the wound so that it heals well.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged so deep that it cannot be seen, then examine it with your hand at the full length; and if you feel it, examine it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot examine the wound because of its depth or the presence of the arrow, cut or bend the skin around it as much as you can, and then pull out the arrow; and be very careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out; and exam the wound thoroughly before removing the arrow.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull once, if the hair until the base is rotten, then try, for extraction it is difficult.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the pain of extraction makes you contrary, then introduce what we have said about the cure in his chapter; and guard against incising the nerve and opening a vein, and do not dare to extract the arrow without danger, soon or late, firmly or loudly; and place the patient according to the form he was when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or does not open anything of it, or the cure is swollen in place so that it can be seen or felt differently: then cut up until the pliers can take them, and then extract them: if it is now a jump.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it for a while longer, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out; and if there is an arrow in it, squeeze the arrow out completely; and if there is a nail in it, remove the nail by twisting; and if the arrow or nail can be removed, take care to administer a strong blow, so that the tip of the arrow or nail enters the handle of the instrument; then draw out again, and if the arrow or nail has been removed, squeeze the instrument from which the tip comes out, so that the arrow or nail will come out easily.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is lodged, then it is necessary that you cut all around the place where the arrow enters; if you can, do so, and then treat the wound as it is necessary to do.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow enters where the penis or in the belly or in the bladder or at the side, and it is near, then you can cover it, if you cover; and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if it is a job; and cure until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers that are used to treat arrows are similar to an eye, and thus the shape is this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And of many ways there are: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the butt-end is also like the beak of a bird, to fit to the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The pliers for fitting and for picking up are these.
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins from the chest
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	XXXI veins from which one heals: XVI heads, that is to say: the II batans which are behind the ears, called the dous "herbech"; and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and the II veins which are in II livers of the II hairs, called "aspires"; and the vein which is at the front forehead; and the vein which is at the head of the child; and the II ligatures which are at the nape; and the II veins which are above the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augeherich"; and the II veins which are behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins which one commonly heals are V in each arm: the one is the cephalic, and is to the left side of the chest, and it is called by the lay people "vein of the head"; and its counterpart is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and it is called by the lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic is at the right side of the chest, and it is called by the lay people "vein of the belly", and is on the top of the ribcage, and this is that which one heals, which opens clearly above the arm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l'auriculaire et l'anulaire, et si à II rains; et en la jambe et ou pitié sont III voines: l'une si est désöz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre côteit, et li second sophene qui est à la cheville dou destre côteit; et li voine qui est appelee "nesse", que est en la cheville de l'autre costei; et en l'autre jambe sont III voines désöz celles.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salvature is the vein that runs between the thumb and the index finger, and if there are two of them; and in the leg, where the foot is, three veins: one is located on the lateral side of the wrist, on the inner side of the forearm; the second runs from the ankle to the outside of the calf; and the third called "nesse", which is found in the ankle of the other leg. The salvatures that are behind the ears help with ancient catarrh and headaches; and the qualities of the salvature, as I told you, are that you apply the palm of your hand to the area where the salvature is located, and rub it; then tie the person's neck with a strap, until the two salvatures that run behind the ears come out on both sides of the head: feel where there is pain on one side, and make an incision from above; then cut the vein and draw blood until you see the pulse running; then tie it up, until it heals. And I have already mentioned incisions and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation of the text: 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The doctor of the front head pain is as much as that of the face old diseases, and migraine, and bright light. And the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the pain appears; then take the instrument called "trowel", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the pain, and stretch with your hand or something else, and let out blood as much as you see fit; then loosen the patient's neck, and bind the pain until it is healed, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the fire should not be too hot; and the doctor works across the body, as the bone is close by, and there is a risk of breaking the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The doctor of the two wings that are in the two arms helps with bloodletting, and with tinea, and bright light, and oriol (a bird) in oil, and old diseases of the face; and the quality of their treatment is that the patient twists his neck without a ligature, as we have described above; then treat it, and also the doctor works across the body, a little of long flame, a little of large fire, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is a subtle flame, by chance let it break; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it up with wool, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the blood from the vein runs with ague and sudden fever, and with diseases of the face, such as headache and rumbling in the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the blood so that the patient strangles himself, then draw his vein with your left hand, and take a subtle long flame, and put it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will begin to run now; and do not go too much by the fire, and make the blood run according to your need, then bind it up for a night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the health of the lips: they help to clean in the mouth, and prevent decay of the gums, and splits in the lips, and diseases of the teeth and tongue.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this remedy is to place the patient in front of you, and to stretch his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at its veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you can recognize them because they are black, and because they are small veins that are black: so take the largest of each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The doctor should cauterize the veins with fire after the head injury and then extract the tongue, treating any diseases of the uvula or mouth; the patient should bite down on his hand like this between the rays of the sun, and the doctor will pull out the tongue, and look for a black vein in each side: so heal them both, and do not cut too much, for the veins are there.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly treated are cut in two ways: either with a strong flame, or with a thin olive oil, which is called 'cauterization'; and they are wide and thin according to the width and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is called a 'mirtle', and it is wide as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is a craft to open the veins that are flat and full of great blood that appears, and which contain great blood and disturbance; and this is the shape of the flame olive.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and is for saving the veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cure for the bazillar vein, which is one of these veins, so that it helps diseases that are caused in the throat, and neck, and chest, and stomach; and comes to the healer that he heals with bloodletting, and that he wares the artery that is caused.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he stops the artery, and the blood comes out, so that it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and should not be held on fire, but cut off as an animal.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the bazillar does not open plainly, so that you have to cut it away, and change another one; or you do not want any part of his blood, or you cure a vein in his place by cutting off his arm: it opens plainly; and is stopped with bloodletting, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the place of the vein, so it is also necessary that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then mark the place behind, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein under the flame; and guard against hurting in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is of the artery: so be careful.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it coming up above as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: hurry then, and put your finger on it for a long time, and take your finger off when it stops bleeding, because it often bleeds; bind the arm, and let it be like that, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it does not stop bleeding, and he comes to you, and the medicine is not present, so open the artery if it opens, for the head of the rețineth it; and make it stop bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig tree, and bind it, and take one of the halves and hold it well until the other day; if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, then apply the powder that stops blood, as we have said, to several dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the ability of the arm of the hand.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The remedy for the vein in the middle, so that it stops bleeding from the head and the base, because it is composed of the bazillary and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the patient to burn himself with fire on the nerve which is injured, and if he burns too much in perfection, then he will break the nerve, and it will swell and its pain will be great, and perhaps it will not heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtility, then you must cut off the nerve with an axe; and avoid the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two knees, then cut it short.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And the relief for the head injury is such that it draws blood from the head, and calms the pain; and it is saved by striking at the olive flame or at the torch flame, for it is the most effective for all veins, since it does not damage the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to seek the lighter treatment first, and if that does not work, then begin again; and perhaps at times the treatment will cause swelling in some people, but it does not harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the relief depends on your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about relief is that relief should only be used to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; and it should be applied in one of the three veins: the head, the chest, or the base; and it should be applied at the beginning of a fast, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it should be applied on the first day or third day after two hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The doctor who is accustomed to treating diseases does not have a specific time limit; instead, they work during the day and at night without resting, and do not stop until the patient has fully recovered. It is not appropriate for doctors to treat children under twelve years old or pregnant women beyond their seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Doctors should not treat very old people who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When treating a patient, regardless of the illness, it is necessary to first prepare the bowels with a light enema if there has been constipation, and to ensure that the intestines are not affected by waste matter that could harm the main organs; it is also important not to treat patients who are too elderly or those who are very ill, as their condition may deteriorate quickly. It is not advisable to treat patients who have recently consumed large amounts of meat, wine, or drugs, or those who have suffered a blow to the head, as these conditions can lead to subtle disorders and complications; also, it is important to avoid excessive consumption of food and drink, as well as luxurious living, lustful desires, and similar things. The doctor should be orderly and disciplined in their practices, and they should follow a higher standard than those they treat; they should massage the patient's arms twice or three times, then gently stretch the ligaments, as when there is too much tension or stiffness, the tissue cannot be stretched easily; then the doctor should rub the patient's chest with his left hand while feeling for the ribs to ensure the lungs are not affected. Finally, the doctor should apply heat to the area with a small amount of warm oil, and place the patient's right hand on their chest while the doctor applies the oil; this will help relax the lungs and allow them to expand freely.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like strings for the surgeon, and if there are such ones that are plain to wind up, so that when one sets it on fire, then takes it off fire, and cannot open the vein, they are these; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because in this way it is necessary that the surgeon be careful about such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; and if not, then begin again a little more of that place where or by hospital it is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limbs are swollen and the patient hopes for it, let him rest one day or two, and do not bind his arm: perhaps there will come abscesses; nor enter or bathe, then begin again the surgery if it pleases you; and if the puncture is small, or the cut subtilely, and you doubt that it may not hurt as much as you see, then make the incision right through all the limb; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see a vein burst, do not recommend the use of salt, and put a little oil on it, because it softens the heart of blood, and is moistened by this oil; and in this way administer the oil to each vein that you treat the veins with, to stop the flow of blood; and this also makes the tripe and bowels smooth when put on the vein; but if it is too thick, it breaks apart easily.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If you have a large abscess that keeps coming back, most importantly when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put a wet sponge on the spot with a little heat, and hold it for an hour; and it is right that you do this after the blood has left the vein, and if it stays in place after a few days, there is no harm done; and if you see it, put any of aloe or mirrour, juice of calument, mustard, or similar on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is abscess and appearance in the hand of the doctor; so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be sure that you do not put your hand on anything of what we have said, because perhaps in a cut without the artery; but make him dry with poultice so as to harden the place, and then treat him with other treatment until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat every wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it flow until it is red, and if you see a lump, let it cool; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for those who are flat and foreign, and have a need to extract blood, let them make a larger wound and let the flames be wide; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and you must heal them little by little, and often, and the way of healing is saved from bleeding of blood and stretching of nerves, and it is better than long healing does not do.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose pulse is weak in health, it is fitting to give moistened bread in grape juice; if he is heated, then add warm water three or four times; and if he has a cold complex, then moisten it before health with moistened bread in musk syrup, or in honey syrup flavored with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and fennel, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he sweats in health, after the flow of blood, then it is fitting that he smell brew of wine and subtle aromatic syrup, and use the other things which we have said in the chapter or composition for fainting, to evacuate the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up his food and is healthy again, then it is fitting that he is healed little by little according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits after the first wound, and has a strong fever, if he heals seven hours after the first wound, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who vomits in another place, should he heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has fever inside his body, and it comes out through the pores, causing great fever; if so much is extracted, and the pore is enlarged as much as it can, then you should consider all the conditions of healing, and put your hand on his pulse when it heals, so that death does not come from the pores, and this happens many times when the healing is neglected; and you shall not consider when you separate the arm, and bring out blood the second time, and the pore is closed, that you press firmly; if it is bent, he should extend his arm gently, for that would be bad; but let it be until it heals the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is frozen at the pore of the vein comes out, and put a piece of string soaked in water on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, let it go and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if need be, to drain the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is attached to the vein at the base of the head because it is complex.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of the vein is such that the patient holds his hand in warm water until the pulse is red; then let it move slightly so that the vein appears clearly, then make the cut across it, not wide nor long; and let the cut be next to the joint of the hand, and do not remove it, if it is in esteit, but rather let it remain there; for we put more trust in it when it is in esteit than when it is in a cold state; and the cut of this vein is more secure than any other vein, since it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The medicine for the right hand is all the ailments of the liver; and this is how it should be done: remove the hand and dip it in hot water until the vein has gone, if you can see it; and then cut off the end, and chop it up whole and whole, unless it grieves something; and don't chop it too much finely, because the nerves are all naked from the bone, and then put the hand back into the hot water, if it is stuck in the wound, and cannot be drawn out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and thread on it to hold it tightly together, and do the same for each finger.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The medicine for the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse; and do the same as I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The medicine of the Sophene is good for all diseases that come about in the body, as are diseases of the feet, retention of wind, disease of the kidneys, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of this medicine is that the patient should dip his foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it stops, and put it up on a joint at the foot; and if the pain is in the ankle, and then many rains go out from under it; cure it or the rain is larger, or at the ankle, so it hurts more.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cure it on the foot, guard against the sores that are under it, and also cure it by walking as in riding; and let the flames go away.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get them out, put the foot back into the water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the pain persists for the first time, then start again for the second above a little, because the leg is salt; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and make it with the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle and its pain goes up to the knee when it is for pain.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its pain is that the patient goes in or out with it, and pulls it off the ankle 4 times by twisting, for otherwise does not open the vein; and if it opens, you must do it with all your strength, and pass more than once; and be careful to cut it, because the leg is up, and she is very relaxed.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then make a rain of the leg that opens or closes from the foot, and turn it slightly, and take care of the nerves; and make as much pain as you see, and then loosen the leg, and put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or of air, or of glass; and the suction is performed according to two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or not wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This is the first sentence of the text: "Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d'arain, ou de verre;
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Ventouses are made of horns, or of air, or of glass;" and if by necessity, or for habits, we administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between; for there are some who, when they have to use ventouses, become heavy-headed; and those who experience redness on their faces, and in their chins, and darkness in their eyes; and those who taste blood in their mouths, and have a slippery tongue, and feel hunger and thirst; and those who dream, and see things that are not there.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even more so when it is hot in the month of July, we order them to be vented after three hours from daybreak.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And the bloodletting for headaches at the base of the skull ... it comes to a standstill, and it is not until all the blood has been evacuated from the whole body that this ventilation occurs; and this ventilation is in keeping with the bloodletting for the headache at the base of the skull, and it does not happen unless there is a cold complexion or someone has a fever, because this does great harm; and so it only happens if they fast in the evening, or if they have had a cold.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured often become dizzy, and so it is necessary to place the cup a little lower by doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And the bloodletting for the base of the skull and the temple is in keeping with the bloodletting at the base of the head and the temple, and so it is necessary to give a little less because it might cause dizziness or upset the stomach and intestines.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The windsations in the two ribs on the throat as the pains in the head, and obturations and headaches, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place of the health of the bazaar; and it is necessary that you command the doctor that he express his hand to put it, that he does not cup the artery, and no corrently of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windsations in the mouth are worth illness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windsations of the shoulders are worth illness that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windsations in the arms are worth as much as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and command the doctor that he does not sew too perfectly, for its bones are naked, and knows how to strip and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse that is on the back so it reaches the foundation of the heart, and the diseases of the soul, and it must be large and made of leather, so that it has the skill to milk well; and perhaps, if it were small, it would break; and it would make big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg ventouses open widely, for they draw blood from the whole body, and they are like the old pains of the feet and the legs, and of the bladder, and they remove the flowers; and they are in place of the two knees and the two ankles, but nevertheless they weaken the body over a long time, and bring death to many people with their dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put the ventouse is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and then put it away, and stir evenly, and do not cease to do so until you see the red and inflamed place, and the pain of the blood; then let go, and remove the ventouses, and take care in the dispositions of the bodies, for there are some who have very sore hearts, and clear pores: it is good to hurt them once only, and to make large wounds, and a little bit deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the outside is thick, then he needs to hit twice: once to thin the blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the outside is very thick, then he needs to hit three times; and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we only need to squeeze once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw blood, then we should do so often; and if the outside is thick, then he should strike fully, and the end should be that the wound pierce suddenly, and cover with those who have thick and hard skin, and who are prone to bruises, you should moisten the places of the suction cups with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in spring, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumis seed oil; and if it is in autumn, with nettle oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another type.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is too cold and oily, take oil of almonds, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if they have a sore that is dry and large, then it is not necessary to put oil on, but it is necessary to wash it after the cooling of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberries, or water of cucumbers, or water of porcelain, or other things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has moisture, if it dries up like this, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have too much moisture shall rise with old wine, or with water of oak, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other things; and it is not necessary to go to the bath before the cooling, but after the bath an hour or two; and you should not sleep after the cooling, but when it is necessary to cool down, then when it is hot.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware that those who are healing are coleric, and that their juice is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that they drink cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in the shade, and similar things; and little apples, and char of chestnuts, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and little soup, and little apples and small birds and pigeons; and on the day when it will be windy, they should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men triple or musk before the wind, or after, to strengthen the main members; and soften the juice, but it is only necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The windies that are put not to hurt are those that are put on the liver, and on the pancreas, and podagre, and on the belly and the buttocks and the kidneys and the hinch; for this member does not bear to be hurt on the olives, and it is only done so as to draw blood from one member to another, just as we put windies on the breasts when the disease is there; to remove the viscidity that is in the member, just as we put windies on the belly and the buttocks to weaken the member; and to relieve the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, it is relieved by its attractive virtue, perhaps the operation or the stone has left its place; and thus is done when they are put on the liver and the pancreas when there is a windiness retained, and these windies are emptied only to suck so little; and they are never emptied together, nor ever plain water, as in the disease of pleurisy, and in this way is the windie filled with hot water or with water in which herbs have been boiled that are appropriate for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus: It should be two hands wide and half a palm deep, and it should have a hole in the center about the size of an awl, just as for inserting an needle, and it should be made of leather, smooth on the outside, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member; and in the middle there should be a crossbar of leather or iron, to hold a grip, and there should be large and small ones according to the disease and the age of those who take them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of lean men are different from those of fat men.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And it should be placed on the member: take the grip of wax or linen, and put it in the middle of the suction cup across the bar, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the member, and these two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when you push, the vapor comes out, and take off the suction cup; and take the grip again as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of a lung disease, and all water, there is no knife or hole, but it is only when it is plain of water, and is placed on the limb so lightly; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	The text describes a treatment for a lung disease involving the use of suctions cups (ventouses) applied to the body. It emphasizes the importance of using cups that are small enough to fit in specific areas like the mouth and gums, and similar parts of the body. The text also advises against applying cups to the body when there is water present, as it could cause harm. Instead, it suggests waiting until the body is dry before applying the cups. When using the cups, they should be placed gently on the body without causing any discomfort or injury. The treatment involves placing the cups on the affected area and leaving them in place until they are clean and free of any buildup. Once cleaned, the cups can be reused.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, let the level rise in this way, and then of water very well, and then strain it; and if the levels are too late after the chest of the animals, so moisten a linen cloth with cold water, and put on, as long as the blood is stopped; and if there is more blood, so put on vitriole crushed, or gall, and similar things, as long as it is stopped; or you put on the level half of peeled peas, and let them sit until they get warm at the level, now it will stop; and if you need more, take other animals.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the animals do not want to take it, so rub the level with fresh blood, or you put in it a needle as long as the blood comes out of it, and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will warm up; and when you see that they are going to defecate, so sprinkle on a little aloe and sewed crushed, or ash, they will defecate now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapter of calumny is necessary many times in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of a fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the wise men have often poured on this chapter of calumny, that they never read any of the old books, or did not read a letter about it; and for this reason the science is strange to our land, for I never found one good book; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have so studied that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter of calumny what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are prepared, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom sets forth her understanding, and holds fast to truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fractures, dislocations, twists, or strains occur in anyone, it is fitting that you quickly heal the sick person on both sides, unless there is some impediment; if the back is weak, or the hips, or the elderly; or if the tension is too tight, or too loose; and do not drink cold broths often, nor eat fatty foods, and do not fill yourself with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the heat of the abscess, or the expansion of matter in the limb. If a disease returns to its original rule, then he should return to his previous treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce great thickness, or viscosity, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and eggs, and pies made from goat's milk, and cheese, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with great nutrition healing begins more quickly and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of old and weak people cannot properly heal or be joined together by nature's own process, nor those which are too tender, such as children's; but treat the broken bone with thick, strong flesh that hardens it and joins it together, until it is as strong as before; and do not at all omit to feed it on large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in twisting, as if the cutting of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that is all a small fracture.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own tool for restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place; and it is known that the break of the bone by what the turn is, and properly open by the sides, and a little pressure on the hand; and when there is no twistiness or bend in the foot, and the sick person does not feel much pain, there is no fracture; but it can have twistiness, or a cut, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put on medicine that comes here after, and then restrained now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that goes in arvol, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to put them at a point even, so that the apostemes come up and down; and if the apostemes come up, if he leaves for one day, as long as the apostemes are calm; then he puts it even with the mues that you can easily and cleanly, and know that the restoration of him is more easy than the restoration of the one where there are pieces; then restrain, as it is necessary here after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces that break, if the estent of two parts, is hand or foot, or to your hand, it is a small member, or II strands, or a strand and to your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are set in place, then return by all means the additions in their places to the mues that you can, and keep that by your work no lesion comes to the patient nor pain; and fit well the two heads of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well in the hand if you think it is not good: if the drawstring is done well and does not pull too much, do not press as those who make them come by their work with hot and contracted member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, chastise the patient well that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, neither turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the member is so assured that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, he is not in place, and it is necessary to put him in a position that he does not feel any pain; and guard well that he is placed correctly so that there is no tortuosity when he is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken member is diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arm and leg and hands: it is necessary to wrap linen cloth soft and fine; and those that are large, such as hip and thigh: it is necessary to wrap a broad and sturdy rope, for the broad ropes embrace all the large member, and hold it tight on all sides so that there is no gap; then tie light ligatures, III turns or IIII according to the size of the limb, and grasp the rope at the top end, then go up over the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture is moved a little; and soften the rope a little and a little, until you press a lot of the healthy part, then take another rope, and return to the top of the fracture, and hold it gently, not too hard or too gently, as we have said in the first line about; then put between the ropes linen or cloth, so that they are all equal, then bind them well together, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing to the abscess, and let it stand for some days; then strain it over your fingers, and let half a polecat's tail be boiling, or a piece of fust from which they make cleats, or palm fronds, and let it be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And the strap that one puts on the break should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should be as far away from the member as it needs to be; then strain it over the fingers as you did with the first strap, and then tie it up tightly, just as in the first strap on the break; the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be fine, not too thick or too thin, and of soft linen; for if the thread is thick, like the ropes that foolish people make their straps from, it is a great mistake, because the strap cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it only needs to be about two inches of space between each strap.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the hooks of the stars after extraction in their healthy state, then let them be bound with linen, or another kind of rag, so that they do not get cut.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the cure is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to extract stars from all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not appropriate to put stars on them before five or seven days, or more according to the urgency of the abscess that has broken out suddenly; and use here the ancient method of plasters for restoring breakages, dislocations, and twists: and this is that you take flour so that it adheres to the walls of a mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put on this composition, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster that restores the break to many different conditions, especially to women and small children, for it is not appropriate to make it too tight or too loose.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering: for breaking, dislocation and torsion: take the nettle, the fern, the onion, the asafetida, the arabic gum and mugwort, 10; mirr and aloe, 5; alchenille, 8; and reduce them to powder, mixing them with honey from bees. If the complexion of the body is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plastering for torsion: take mugwort and beeswax, 10; mirr and aloe, 9; acacia, 6; and black pepper, 10. Grind them well and mix them with honey or bee venom, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of plastering for joints and bones out of place, which soothes the pain immediately and repairs the size and fracture: take linseed, and soak it in water and cooked oil, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cysts do not respond well, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make an ointment that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-pine leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for healing bone breaks and reducing the swelling of an abscess: take fresh milk and mix it with wine, then apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marshmallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of vetches, each of them in equal parts; grind them together and mix with wine, and the member is warmed, apply it with water or vinegar, and use this.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make an ointment that is more effective than the first one, which is used when the abscess is persistent and difficult to heal: take milk, wine, and water, each in equal parts, and apply it hot to the affected area.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of wormwood, and seed of flax, buckthorn, millot, and sanace, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of each an equal part; and grind them up, and prepare a paste with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, I hypocras says that one should not put anything on the broken member before it is healed, except a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to me that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of poulticing that is good for lesion and pain: take wool and hair of sheep, or feathers of owl, and wormwood, and silk evenly, and grind them up, and make a poultice and put it on him.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it rest for a little while, and take care that the patient feels no pain or that his nose does not move out of place; if pain comes to its place, or itching, or lack of rest or swelling, then hurry and let it rest, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift up the leg, as long as the itching ceases and the pain is calmed; then leave it to rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with water or oil and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and the pain goes away, then start again gently, and a little plaster, and do not pull it as hard as before; and gently until it is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is chafed and red and painful and swollen all around it, and you have to use poultices and ligatures, then start again, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the limb does not come to rest at all of what we have said, if it does not stay in place except for three days or four or five or seven; and never leaves it for more than twenty days, according to what you see, until the break comes closer to the shoulder, then restrain it more than before, and make the flesh grow thicker, as I have said before; and if you see that the leg is drying up more than is necessary, then dunk it in hot water every time you take it off, and let it air dry for a day or three, by this work therefore cut off the bad blood from the limb, and carefully remove what is causing the deformity, which straightens out the limb: that is painful, and if it is full of fear, and I see no other thing than to leave it and work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways to break up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are various ways to break things up, and there are different shapes and causes. For there is a breaking that is done by the impact of an arrowhead, and the collarbone breaks all the way down to the shaft which goes through it, as if it were made with a hatchet; and for this reason this type of breaking is called "hatchet-work".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or an arrowhead breaks the bone from above without piercing it, and for this reason this type of breaking is called "absolute"; and there is a wound from these two great or small breakages.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	Or if there is percussion inside, or an edge, or a collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a breaking that approaches the tendon which is over the bone, or is under it, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that has penetrated the bone as fine as a hair, and is a small fracture, for this reason it is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by hitting a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and thus a piece of the bone enters the body, and the head of the bone is so shaped as the smith shapes the iron when he hammers it on the anvil; if it goes inside the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens often to those who have their heads wet with water, as the head of a child; and these kinds of fractures are made in many ways, as I will speak about them in due course.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and by the inspection of wounds, and by the cart that is before it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubbed it in, thus opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, take care as to the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, feverishness, or hair growing furiously red and other similar signs in many conditions, so it cannot be healed by doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can do.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone may not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of may come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, so it is that you split the broken part in such a way: and it is that you press the head of the patient, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if the removal of blood comes to discover the bone, or abscesses, help yourself with what is convenient, and it is that you fill the place of drapings wet with oil rosin; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calmed, and be sure of the removal of blood; then begin to break the bone, and this is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you split a very narrow part in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I bottle another way more than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various lengths of scales, some short and others long, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and do it lightly, so as not to hurt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is tough and hard, it is necessary that you pierce behind it, so that you put scales with bars on top of it, not completely piercing through the bone but leaving a margin or circle above it so as not to let the tip go beyond the bone; and you need to have many, so that each comes in its place at the end of the bone, so that you have bars for all of them; and this is the form of the three ways of making bars:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing behind the bone is that you place the bar on top of the bone, and turn it back two or three times until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put the bar elsewhere a little further on, and do the same all around, then chop the space between the pits, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you hold the bone in your hand, or with any of the tools that you have, such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinews.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have broken the bone and treated it, if you notice that you are keeping the marrow which is being extracted from the bone with all other instruments that resemble an incision, but it should be softer and finer than the other incision; and if it does not hold any small bones or scales, but cuts the bone lightly on the tools; then cure the wound with tender and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of cauterization is that which Galien says, which is stronger; and the fire is very hot, and this is what he says.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break is open; so that when you have discovered that part, you put the head of this lens-shaped incision there, from which it gets its shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Et ne trenche mie d'une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers loz; puis fier d'un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l'os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s'elle est aerse a l'os, si l'oste legierement, car on l'oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and take good care of the tendon that is attached to it; if it is caught on the bone, then carefully cut the bone, for one cuts the bone well without hurting, and without fear.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are dealing with very sharp razors, and then with even sharper ones, and do not stop doing this as long as it is necessary.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle shaves, you must bring about the cause according to his setting; and this is a thing that is not properly replied to for one who has set his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the leech is uncovered, you should take a linen drape, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled drape, II or III, and moisten it with wine and oil, and put it on the first drape; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not grieve the leech, then remove it after a day or two, until the abscesses are healed, then wash them off, and apply medicines as roots, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and alchimist, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines that have no taste of mordation; and be careful that the wound is clean, so that you do not allow it to get dirty, nor allow a bow to assemble upon the silk cloth of the brain, for if it correrts and pierces, it brings great misfortune upon the patient; for when you put something sharp on the leech, if it stings from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Take great care therefore that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful whether it is or not. And if black bile comes only because of the medicine that has been put on him, which has its virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and three parts of rosewater and one towel with it, and put it on the wound; then cure in the manner of cures that are appropriate until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that the two bones above are never broken by a fall, for they are cartilage, and they do not break unless they bend or twist, and then heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then you should drill a small hole in the nose or buttock above the bone, and make an even hole in it by your little finger, and to the opposite side, until the bone regains its natural form; and do this with care so that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come back to its place, then you must put it right with a small stick at the top of the neck.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is on two sides, then do so otherwise, and hurry to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess has calmed down, then bind at the top of the neck with strips of linen cloth if the break is on one side.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind the other with something else, if the break is there; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the holes of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no one should restore it without wetting the strips first; each day they must be changed.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that this is not good, but it is necessary that the strips be wet with olive oil and powder of malachite; then leave the strips, until the bone has hardened and the joints have healed.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time should you put down feathers in place of tents, and if it snows, cover the breeze block, and blow on the disease; or do as I have said.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to birth while you are working, put cotton soaked in oil or a string of hempen twine or a piece of silk; or
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes to birth, if you put plaster on it by the side, of flour of sesamum and powder of incense, mixed with almond oil, then put bandages that are light, and don't bind it; and if the breach of the abscess is small, and it has broken up into little pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then cut off the fracture, and treat things that have been damaged by water, and soon, as if you put on plasters and oils that are suitable for it; and if there is no wound within the abscess, then cure the tent, and put cow's milk on it, until he is well.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the breaking of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not shattered into two pieces, but rather twisted inside, then one should handle it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is fitting, if the break is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side, then insert your index finger from the right hand into the break slightly, and make it equal with the left hand, and fix it.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is on the second side, then it is fitting that you equalize the two sides with an extension, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement occurs from within at the site of the break, then you should strap it with a gold, silver, or silk cord; then put a double cloth on top of the broken jaw, and put a large, well-made piece of leather on top of it that is as long and wide as the jaw, and tie it securely in place with knots; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, if you let it rest for three days, and then put back what has been changed; and put plaster on, of powder from the mill with a lot of egg or flour from millet, after you have taken off the cerotte; and put on another lighter plaster, and if the plasters hurt, and the disposition of the sick does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times are healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses arise, if you administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take a piece of the bone out; if subtle of the osteotomy are the instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, if you open it by fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when you have boned all these pieces, and there is no delay, so to cool the wound, if it is wide, and put on it I bandages suitable for this, in order to ease the pain, as long as it is healed.
de la forcele	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output and nothing else:
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	And when you have boned all these pieces, and there is no delay, so to cool the wound, if it is wide, and put on it I bandages suitable for this, in order to ease the pain, as long as it is healed.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the break is without a wound, so that you have two ministers, so that one tints the shoulder joint that is broken by the force; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or haircut.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the skill to do more, so place a round pole under the shoulder of the patient with a drape or another cloth, and make it large according to your need; and support and tighten the pole, and hold it toward your hand, so that you put the break in line, as should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot remove the head of the pole at the end, so that it comes out perfectly, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and place the shoulder pole horizontally, and put the ministers' shoulders under it, until the bone of the pole is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on both sides, and if you find it too fragile, so split it open, and remove the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join by any means, so take away this tool of the instrument, to preserve the syrup.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and seems like a spoon, and is not hair, and is also wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has II joints, as you see, and one is wide, and the other is narrowed, as is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bone; and when you are sure of the abscess hot, if the wound, and the rupture is small, or you doubt the abscess hot, if employ the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if it has oil in it, and water and vinegar, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And the removal of the bone, when there are wounds and no injuries, is that you put on the bone the plaster from the mill and the ash of the oven, and put light staples on it, and put a spike around it if you need one; then take a very long bandage about a palm wide, then put the drape twice over the staples, and the plaster; then take a thin spike three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the top of the bandage is hanging down; and put the spike on the fracture, and fasten the spine with it; and remove it from each part, and when you see that the bandage holds well in place ahead of it, and you clearly see that the spike does not move on the bone, then keep it for each day, and when the ligaments relax, if they restrain; and make the sick person bend over his back, and put a small spike around the spine, to raise the shoulder joint up; so lighten the fracture by the strengthening of the shoulder blade, or you hold the arm at the neck, and do not let it slip away from an accident, until XX days; then begin the plaster again, if you see that it is necessary, and fasten it and leave it like this, until it has recovered; and it is recovered in 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation of the text: 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone projects forward, and there is no smooth surface to stop it, then make it up and bone it over, and do as we said in the breaking of the jaw to relieve an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the pie
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The teeth are never broken in the middle, but it happens sometimes; but they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it leans towards the side, and causes great pain to the patient, and there is no alane [a kind of plaster], then sometimes it vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the patient lies down on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and carefully put it in place in all ways as it should be; then cover it with a thin plaster and wrap it around the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return the joints to their places, and hold them tightly, and loosen them at intervals, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if it is necessary to loosen it for corruption or itching which comes to the surface, or for pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and scrape off the plaster, and treat it with remedies; then remove the plaster, and hold it in place until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the rib fracture only comes from deep within the chest, and does not bend too much due to their thinness; and feels very painful when probed.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restore them so that you make the break even, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on plaster, and hold it with a stake, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is turning inward, then the patient feels very great pain and throbbing, as though he were crying, because the bone is crushing the membrane; and he becomes pale, and twists and vomits much blood, which is a sign of grave sickness, and they have put up with great pain.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push the break away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless hot absesses come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let the healthy one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we do not put vacuum on the place, to suck out form, and it seems right; nevertheless, there is doubt that the vacuum will not attract the excesses to the place for the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that we must cover the place with another moisture in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space even, then it is cured of the cure of plague, of meat, and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that protrudes through the cloth, there is doubt in the patient, so you must split the bone at the place of the broken rib, and you must put a tool to hold it; and then you should cut the two ends of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses burst, then put on them with oil of rose and on the lint; and mend while the lint is still wet at that place which needs an abscess, and let it stand on the cost where it must be, until it is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the throat
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Nor does it come with a break in the bones of the neck, nor is there any pain; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see whether he will be well or not, if you notice that his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if it does not move and feels well when it is stretched out, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts medicine on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you can know whether it is healthy or not, pay attention if its muscles are softened, and if the accident that has occurred is in your hands, and on your back wind and elimination without will; and when it is soothed on his belly, if the elimination without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is soothed on his back and he tries to move, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that he is fatal: do not try to treat him.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is this: if there is an abscess, put on the spine or oil of fish or oil of mustard, as long as it is calmed down; then put on a bandage that supports and dries, and tie it with a thread, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain, until he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Et si certains os sont désarticulés, couvrez-les avec du lin ; then osté l'os, puis joigne les deux lèvres de la plaie, s'elle est grande, à une couture, puis appliquez le onguent avec du charbon, tant qu'il soit guéri; et si le chiès de l'os est brisé, ce qui est appelé le "chiès de la cowe", si vous prenez votre couteau de votre main gauche, et le placez égal à l'autre main sur votre pouvoir, puis appliquez l'empâtement et la plâtre dessus, si vous en avez besoin; puis l'osté, et soignez la plaie tant qu'elle soit guérie.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the fracture of the shin bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	For if there is a fracture in the shin bone, and if it is only a small reduction at the top, then lengthen and align with the leg, causing pain to the patient, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting in place is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the broken part; and know what is the break and the shape of it; and if the break is at the top, then make it equal to that break, as long as it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on his stomach, as long as the setting in place of that break is convenient to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, and then put on a board of wood or of timber, and pull out the break so that it does not move, and fix the place where the break was from the sides, as long as the part is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	Et s'il vient à avoir une apoplexie, s'il ne le touche pas, aussi longtemps que l'apoplexie est apaisée, et le met sur celui que nous avons dit plus haut; et puis revient à la restauration, et l'attire comme il convient, s'il n'y a aucun accident mauvais; et c'est la façon.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	For the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	For the dislocation of the shoulder: The adjutoire is that which is between the lo coute and the lo chief of the shoulder, and if it is broken, we must restore it according to one of the two ways: one is that you take a strong tool, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And you make II chains of II lines, and they are pent above, and cut the sick person on a bench; then let him fall some broken arms on the fust, as long as he comes to the ground, and have a fust in hand, and then put it on any heavy thing or li ministers extend it downstream; then make the briseure equal to his hands together, as long as the briseure returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one sways the sick person on his back, and he lays his hand on his throat, then orders two ministers that one bleeds who is on the breeze-block with his hands, and the others bleeds all over the body, and extends each to its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then strip off the flesh of the wound, and on the wound, and each minister extends to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is close to the shoulder's head, then it is necessary that you put the flesh off the wound, and on the wound; and also if the wound is beside the ear, it is necessary to put the flesh gently, without working hard, until the wound is even, and on the ear; then put the wound back in place, if it is supposed to be there, and hold it in place, so that the ear does not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	Et si l'apothemale vient, si tu ne l'extraye pas jusques a sept jours, et mets dessus une autre mouillere en aisle et en oile roset, tant que l'apothemale soit apaisee; puis l'extraye, et la maniere de l'extrayre est que tu mettes l'emplastre sur la briseure, puis rassemble le bras sur l'ajutoire, et mets ta main sur l'epaule ou sur le sein; et mets le bandeau, et extraye sur l'ajutoire et sur le bras, de façon que le bras soit dans le lieu des étoiles, s'aucune chose ne le défende, ou que l'os ne soit muez.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stars, and put on the fracture a wider and stronger star than the others, and leave between each star two spaces, and make each star so large that it crosses the fracture three times from one side; then strain on the stars, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the sitting of the stars and the strapping, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incisions hot, let it lie tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of the three days the link, that itching does not grow or come to place, or the pain cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the adhesive, as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if such an accident does not come, if you do not loosen it until after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back and has his hands on his stomach; and apply the shoulder adhesive with a cotton ball of equal thickness, and look every hour during the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move or become softer; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when it begins to improve, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is fitting that the shoulder and leg should be taken care of for 40 days after the injury; and then, they must be unbound and given baths and ointments to soothe the injury.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is bad and tight, it should not be unbound for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fospiciles," one small and one large, where the small is at the top and the large is below it; perhaps a fracture may occur in only the large fospicile, or in both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fospicile is broken, the healing is easy and quick; but when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult and takes longer, than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small flail that is bruised only slightly, if it is necessary to stretch it lightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If it is the large flail, if it is necessary to stretch it more forcefully; and extend it on one side, and raise the handle of the hammer above the other, and the smaller ones below the others, and let the patient cross over himself, and the hammer in front of him higher than the patient can suffer any strain; then extend the auxiliar members of his arms to the part affected to his hand, or to the leg, and another member to the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then make it even according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage there are pieces, let each one be placed in its place, and if one of them does not hold fast to its place, you shall put a pin through it, and you shall not restore it to its place, but mend it on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaker there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapître; if one takes the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there come abscesses, I have spoken of it to the singular chapître; if one takes the cure. Let me wrap with a liniment made of rosin oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I will wrap it carefully, until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then wrap the bone with the liniment, and I have spoken of it to the singular chapître; if one takes the cure. Let me wrap carefully, until the abscesses are calmed. And then draw the bone away, and take care that the thread which draws it is of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as when itch comes to the member, it is necessary that you dip the member in hot water until the itch is calmed; and let the member rest without constricting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again with the extraction, and if the ligament is relaxed and the bone is dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it is necessary that the healing not be affected by the member, because it is too constricted, then soften it slightly and leave it thus for a few days, until the healing has improved, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the illness, so do not cut off until after 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And when he has opened his mouth well, then let him hold his hands to his throat, and may his throats be even, and may there be no movement or stirring, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this breaker is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	And know that at the back of the hand and to us the two have few breaks, and there comes but a little pain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or painful, so that the patient cries out, and sits straight before him evenly; then let him put his hand on an extended towel, and extend the broken bones, and make them even, as well as they may be, and put the plaster and stamps, if any abscess comes, then put a ring according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped up in I drappery of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it is broken in the back garden between the navel of the plant, so make a rope from drapels, and instruct the patient that he strangle himself at his broken plant; and then draw out with a long drapeil, and be the steele of keur souef as big as the plant of the hand, and strangle him, so that it comes.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it is broken at the back, so that you put a steele on, and another desoze in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and stop the blood between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it is broken at any of the two sides, if it is a pouch, then make it even, as it should be; and draw it out with the plant, and if you see that one side needs to be lifted, put a small straight steele there so it does not move; and if the break is at the other two sides, as in the index or the other, make them even, and bind them together with the sound side which is behind; or you bind them all together by hand, so that they do not come apart, or put a steele on, as though it were a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The rib is often broken, and we can easily see it when it moves forward and backward; and the cure is to bandage it above and below the break, and also to heat it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lays down on his face, then extends each minister equally on either side of the break; and it is at this time that the fracture is mended.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the rib, then one of the ties is on the inside of the rib, and the other ties are on the outside of the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the hip, then tie one of the ties above the hip, and the other ties below the break; then make the rib equal in length with your two hands, as nature has given it, and then put on the plaster, and also bandage it, so that the punctures do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, if he lets it calm down then return to your work and to your cure; the time is made in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	If there is an abscess, if he lets it calm down then return to your work and to your cure; the time is made in some way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if he falls and turns away from that which he came to, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that he holds, if he can, then do so; and if he cannot, then cut at the joint and draw it out forcefully; and cure him as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no times is the chest injured thus that we put stakes here, as in the shoulder and arm; however, when restoring it in this way does not alarm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the chest is restored in a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexities.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the pit of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	that in the pit of the knee there is little fracture, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is only a crack or a hole, and comes to all wounds, and not wounds, and this feels wrong.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et the restoration if one put equal who is round his two, so long as it is assembled moved what one can; then put the plaster, and i put a wide stone, if you need it, and holds it so that it corresponds, then reward all the dispositions that we have said other breakers, so like an abscess warm and others similar; then put to each accident who it corresponds, so long as it is sane.
de la brisure de la jambe	the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Says that in the leg there are II bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and has all the same breaks as those in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is all i. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the bone is broken, then turn back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if a large bone is broken, then feel great pain and see well, and turn back.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then apply the extension, and make it even, and tie the bones evenly; but nevertheless, if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be lighter and less severe; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two strong beams of wood that will support the leg on both sides, and make them long from the knee to the foot; then wrap them in two bands above and below, and tie them firmly together, so that the leg cannot fall to one side or the other, and so it is well; and let no one place a beam under the leg, and set it there to keep it steady, and properly fix it in the break or wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; and if it heals then it is well.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot there is a fracture in some cases, and in many cases it does not happen, but only is injured.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture in the foot bone, and you see these bones sticking out one above the other, so that the person cannot stand on his or her foot, but keeps it down on the ground like this; then apply plaster and put it on, and attach it to the leg with strips of cloth, and with all the things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the joint is still dislocated, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or not.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Et s'il y a aucun des deux brisé, si vous les rétablissez, comme nous avons dit aux deux de la main; puis met au bris un échafaud selon la longueur du deux, et soit un petit peu plus large, puis met dessus le pied celle qui tremble que j'ai dit, et l'extrait en avantant; et s'il y a II ou III, ou plus, brisé, ou mets sur chacun des deux une échafaud selon sa quantité, enveloppée en un drap de lin, et extrait la tremblante dessus le pied; et soit restant sur le chef de la tremblante défuer le ventre du pied, si qu'il le teigne bien.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is fitting that you do not forget the other things that I said about other broken things, as we have said; and aid each accident as it happens.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	the break of the bone between the knuckles
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of nature is broken, if the woman is placed upright and extended, then incline her to the back part of the spine, and support her behind; then fill the womb with cotton from a cloth, and put as much in it as you can; then let the woman stand, and slowly turn her spine, and then let the cotton come out at the opening of the womb, until the bone comes back with the turning; and when she urinates, if the cotton comes out, and when she has urinated, put it back again, and do this for seven days: so the fracture will heal, and she will be well, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a cord around the navel, and pour all the bladder into the womb; then blow into the cord forming air balloons, until the bladder is inside; nature will then bring back the fracture; then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days, until it has healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	Et when the jaw bone of man or woman is broken, put it back as we have said in the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from him who uses his skill and art, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means many good things for the right way of restoration: hear it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the neck, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it on the neck; then wrap it in cloth, and leave it for three days, or more, until it is healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has broken with wound, great or small, such as the hip bone or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have said bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, if the vitriol burn remains, if you have nothing else, then start to restore the broken one in the same hour or day, when the blisters come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the blisters come, if you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm, and do not touch them on the third day or the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on top of the skin, then you must put it out of joint lightly with your hands, in small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal in length so that you can match your hands, then take this instrument of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its thickness depends on the quantity of the wound; and for such an one is to be used three or four times, according as he needs it in each cure of a broken limb; and let it be round and a little thin, so that it does not press heavily on the limb at your touch, and let it be sharp before and thick in the middle, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "pallanche," because it is necessary that the curved head of the shoulder be placed on top of the loin of the bone; and it is cut once, as long as it regains its shape, and is even on one side against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you must chop off the head of the bone as long as the instrument has the power to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument, either an incisor or a file, within your power; then take off what is left of the bone with rough and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been set back in place, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is in its place, then soak the bone in black wine vinegar and let it rest properly; and do not put on the wound liniment or anything else where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer talc when you have healed the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it all around with a covering according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself well in mind that the wound should not be bound up with the break; and many times this has been done to the patient, and brought about his death or corruption; and the bindings are looser and softer than those of other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is bad or large and you doubt that good luck will not come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not right to put on talc; but wrap it tightly in hard cloth instead of talc.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days to form a boil on the wound, then if you have put anything that you have put on all over, and you put a healing ointment, as a four-fold ointment and its likes.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the boil runs down轻松.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it passes and he cannot join but runs together, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so that you must cut the wound with a knife, and all these painful pieces that come out.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	Et when the jaw is broken and opened over the limb, as the jaw of the cheek or the shoulder, and other large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times death comes, but leave it to rotten; perhaps it will be cured after XX days or XXX, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	These bruise which come by the sudor
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	come often after the health of the broken one, mostly when it is near the joint, and an ugly thing is to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make the limbs do their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if we are fresh: if you administer sticky medicines, as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarc colle, acacia, and similar things; so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and mix them with sticky wine or with a lot of egg yolk or with honey; and put them on the wound in piles, and tie them well, and do not untie them in a day; and then untie it, and begin another, until the nodules are hard; or you tie it to a well-made piece of cork; for the property of cork is that it hardens all the swellings on the limbs; and if the nodule is already hardened, it must be cut off, so that the surplus appears, or you shave it with a razor, until it is hardened, and cure it as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the jail
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone has healed, and the weak and delicate members remain, it may be due to one of several causes: because he was bound too tightly, and was not bound as he should have been; or because he had too many ties, and could not feel the member's movement; or because of too much inflammation; or because of too great a movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body柔软，as many times as there are sores in it; and give him baths, and give him joy and laughter; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts a lot of blood, and often dunk it in hot water, until the blood flow to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two limbs twisted after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after recovery, and the bone is broken, and the form of the limb is ugly, however, it does not damage its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that we must break the limb all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; these practices are blamed, and they bring about great harm and sometimes death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is good that they be bathed in hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, as foils of fat, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the plaster with a softening substance, such as well-made dandelion, and you take the musk of fat, and confit it with linseed oil or sesame oil, and make a plaster; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with hay from colon, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the neck moved by constantly and long-term friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so let there be movement in each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if there is pain and stiffness in it, as in stone, it must be opened with a sharp knife slightly; and put resin and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back by gentle movement.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, if the joints swell, and by chance he is put back to his place at his own risk; for this causes many pains: often it brings spam and other pains; however, when this has come, if he is made well, then leave him, until the abscesses are calm; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then move it slightly, and heal each member as the cure comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the antidotes for dislocations of the shoulders up to the tip of the finger.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And let me tell you about the dislocations of the jaws: and they are out of place a little, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the floor, and the saliva flowing from the mouth so that it cannot be held back, nor can the mouth be closed, and enveloping the tongue with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are small, return them with many different positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it without hesitation; and in this way that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and pour a little potion from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so the dislocation is on two sides; and the other two hands are to be away, in order to make it equal; and order the patient that he softens his jaws and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let him set his head to rest at equal intervals until it is back in place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And let him bring back his head to rest at equal intervals until it is back in place. And if they are stuck together, make them wet with hot water and oil, gently pulling them apart; do not tarry in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they have been brought back to rest equally, and the mouth of the sick person is well closed with a softening agent, put it on draping wreathed in wax made from olive oil and wax, then gently lift them up by the legs; and let the sick person sleep on his back, and his cheeks be between two pillows, so that he does not move or strain himself at all, but eat easily, as long as the pain has subsided and the jaws have been healed and made whole. And then feed him lightly, and do not worry about opening the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well healed and whole.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their places within an hour, and are not restored to their natural positions, then fever and heat set in customarily, and by chance there is an upset of the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many die in it within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not dislocate from inside the neck in the continuation of the windpipe and is dislocated at all times from the outside, and it can be felt clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then you press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place; and the jaw which is facing toward the throat cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated at all times, then put it back to its place as we have said before; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is well. And so also is the shoulder joint returned to its place when it has been dislocated from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	I know that the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: either it comes out of place with respect to the socket; or it comes out of place with respect to the neck; and sometimes it comes out of place with respect to the back, and this happens rarely; and sometimes it comes out of place with respect to the chest, and this happens rarely too; and many times it comes out of place with respect to the arm, and at these times one must go to hospital; and at those times when one has enough strength, one should return slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens that some men have a hit or a break, and the shoulder swells up with hot fever, and one believes that it has dislocated from this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore you must test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l'assele, et met difference entre l'espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l'espaule une fosse, et desoz l'assele au tochier le chief de l'espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s'elle est desaleeee en haut, si n'est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n'est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the sick hand up, then put the pads out of the arm, and lift the joint up to its place with force; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it up, because it will come off again; so comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in the days of our hands later, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and soft and soothing vapors are given, as an infusion of mint and fenugreek and melilote in water, and are applied; then the patient is covered with a blanket, and an assortment of one size, not too warm or too cold, is put on the back, then the doctor lays hold of the patient's hand; and another minister covers the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns right away, and he stops if you continue in this way: and it is that you make a present of a man who is greater than the patient; and stand on one side of the body, and bottle the shoulder out of the blanket of the patient, and lift the blanket up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers lay hold of the patient's hand downward from the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, with nothing heavy enough to hold it, the dislocation comes back again.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if the patient is too light, with nothing heavy enough to hold it, the dislocation comes back again. And this is how you do it: and there take a long stick from one of the arms of a strong tree, which has the top facing exactly towards the ass; then cut off three fingers' width from both ends, so that the stick is about four fingers wide; then extend its hand forward in the air on the other side, forming a joint which will return to its place comfortably; and if it does not come back for all these things which we have said, then do this cure: take a stick with two arms of great length and four fingers' width, which has the top facing exactly towards the ass;
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	And then put the top of the stick under the ass exactly; then place it on top of the ass; and extend your arms up the stick, and support the dislocated shoulder with the stick, and your hand at the top of the stick, and then put your arm on a small pole of a strong tree, and let your body hang by one side: the joint will return to its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is ready in any way, so that you put an equal wool thread on the axle, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and aloes of the egg, all over the shoulder and back, then remove the axle gradually, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let it rest thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck a little, so that the members are comfortable, because he will heal faster; and then suck more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or any other cause, so that you make three piercings in it, as it is placed before or with the plaster of the piercings.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it slides after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm forward, then you know that the nerves in the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and you know that the joint has never been properly placed.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is above the shoulder, and the breasts, or behind, is made by impact, and stretching of the hands, and I apply it somewhere else; and treat until they are well.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the recovery comes grit to the member, and late movement, then the patient uses it many times, until that grit is healed, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated from the front and back, and that it does not return to its place, for we see it and feel it clearly; and dislocate according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the ill shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is decayed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the bones come together, for if the bones come together, then it would be more painful to reset it; and perhaps it cannot be reset completely from all sides, especially at the back; so it hurts more than other dislocations and may even lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is this, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend its hand between your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands at the back according to the shoulder forward and backward, and press the joint to its knuckles together, or at the root of the palm, until it regains its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if he is dislocated in front, so he returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and proud of the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not return to his place, so administer a strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they tint them two ministers, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide; and when you see the joint with the joint to his hand, so oil it with no oil to soften the joint, then tighten the joint firmly, until it recovers; and when it is in its place, put it on plaster dry with ashes of alf, and strain it firmly, and tie the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then undo it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then untie it and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well fitted, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint has been put back in place, and it moves around, then bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is relaxed; or you put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and let him go in or swim; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the fat back on, and then go in or swim; and do this II times or III, until it is well; and if you see, then put a wet sheep's skin on it, heated with butter, and strain it over; then bring it back to its place.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is less stable than that of other joints. However, it is necessary to return it to its place immediately, while it is still dislocated, so that the joint swells or an abscess develops.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you bring it back, place the injured hand on a table and stretch it out. Keep your eyes focused on its position so that you can see if it is in place, and then put it back into place; place the patient's palm down on the table with their fingers spread out.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's palm down on the table and spread out their fingers.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; but if the extraction of the pus from the abscesses does not relieve him, then leave it like this for now.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, then the joint is twisted; and do not bother the patient unless his hands are wet, and he can't extract anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries have been cut, otherwise there is only one way to extract it by means of a delicate cauterization, and perhaps there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put it on the pus as we have said, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then take it off and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he can't move it well, and there is no fracture, if the hot water makes it moist, and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not displaced at each end, nor on the back of the palm or belly; then they are bent, and shift the dislocation to the pouche until it returns, then support the head of the finger with your thumb, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and let it rest for a day, and then put it in line that day; and from then on, if he has moved, turn him again, and let him move, and reline him; and do this often, until he is tight, and do so too, if it is displaced at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until he is well; and do also, if it is displaced from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not displaced at each end, nor on the back of the palm or belly; then they are bent, and shift the dislocation to the pouche until it returns
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or collarbone is dislocated, or multiple dislocations occur, there will be no cure unless it is quickly treated, for death comes swiftly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the exudations are without taste or scent, that it cannot be held, and often one of the limbs becomes soft, or the two arms or one, and often the esplanade moves in four directions; this is called "gilbosier": if this comes from childhood then there is no cure or recovery for the whole.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting down or percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of curing with great words did not bring much good at all; but I have simplified them according to my intention, and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the Gilbosier which comes from behind, there is no beginning or cure; and likewise that which comes straight in two directions, and cannot be cured except by that which properly comes from behind, as I say; it is that the patient should lie flat on his back in an equal position, and have the straining taken off him so that he does not hurt himself; then set a piece of wood at the head forming a platform, and another between the feet, and tie a rope to the head and the other end to the feet; and let the two ministers fasten the ropes, one to the head and the other between the feet, among the two logs; and let them be well fastened, as we have said, and the mirer sets his palms on the esplanade forming, until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Et s'elle ne revient par ceste cure, si prenne une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l'espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l'autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu'il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if this cure does not succeed, then take a table three arms long, and shave off a section of the wall, and place the patient on one side, and pour water from the table onto the wall, then set the middle of the table over the spine; and place the doctor's tools over the other head of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see anything, do it with a turner that turns in your hand.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, put on plasters with lots of wax, and then the staples, and then the stake of a tablet of three fingers long, which purifies his place of the gimbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie him with a thread as we have said, and use the subtle healing methods until he is well; and if anything comes at the end of health, administer softening and soothing medicines with the stake that we have said before; and never give him a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come in the back spine from the back, and take care that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens up, so do not have any presumption: by chance would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the joints of the hip and shoulder come only in dislocations, not at all like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, before and behind; and more inside, and less before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy, it is farther away, and more bent than the healthy, and cannot double the sick knee; and this is the place which is swollen and hot with an abscess, for that the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that which comes outside is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that which comes before are that his leg is right according to the completion; nevertheless, it does not double the knee with pain, and when one makes it walk, it cannot go forward, and holds back its urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he passes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has been behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and is this leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in its place among the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And the signs of him who has been behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and is this leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in its place among the ribs. If this dislocation is old, and it takes a long time to heal according to its condition, then there is no cure; and it only comes that he has presumptiveness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those who have a fresh dislocation, and there are the four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset the joint, and make it tighten and go away, and turn it from side to side; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare the patient very well, and hold his leg very firmly with two hands, or with one ligament that is tied to the knee; and another minister extends his hand over him in such a way that he can bottle his hands from his knees, then ties him by a ligature on the thigh; and another pulls his hair out at the roots; and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	And this way of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you should place the patient on their back, and then tie the ligament to the root of the thigh, and let go of the skin, then extend the ligament upwards towards the pubic bone, and upwards towards the forceps; then another minister will embrace the large tendon of the thigh, and will stretch it away from the body: then if it returns to its place now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the sick person together with a strong rope under the heels, and on the thighs, and the sick leg should be extended more than the other; then hang it on the head of a pole, and above the ground are II long arms; then order the minister that he embraces the head of the hip, and let others embrace the hip firmly, for the joints will now return to their places.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are away, then lie the sick person down, as we have said in that which has gimberly, and stretch the rope properly on the sick leg, and on the thigh also; then put II torches, I at the head and another under the feet, then insert one torch between the hips of the sick person according to his form; and let there be wet drapings around, so that it does not burn the sick person, then spread each minister towards him, and the master should put his hand on the dislocation equally.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, set on .ie. a table, and press it thus as we said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are forward, if it is necessary to extend the leg of the patient inwards, and according to what I have said; and put his weight upon the sound side, then press with the other hand, and bring it forward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are backward, if it is not necessary to extend the leg of the patient outward, nor to raise him up on the ground, but rather that he should be placed as if the leg were forward, as we said in regard to the laying down on the two knees; and let him lie on his face, and stretch the bandage thus as we said before, and press it on the joint against the table; and it will be complete when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then tie the bandages, and apply the plaster, and tighten it with a strap, so that the knee does not move; and let him rest three or four days, then untie him, and make him jump about, as long as the members remain firm.
de la dislocation dou genoil	from the dislocation of the hip joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hip is dislocated in three ways: namely, inwards, outwards, and backwards; do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient that he should bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not bend to his knee, knowing that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his kneecap with your palms, and pull it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee cap; and have others extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg to his knee comfortably; and put the paste on, and make him walk with his leg bent to his knee, and hold it together for three or four days, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the members are not at their place, if one administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, nor completely displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are such that the ankle is displaced, and the tend to the part where it is displaced: one should gently ram it back into place when it is only slightly displaced, and one must gently extend it with his hands.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is displaced from the top, you should make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg away from under the body; then you bring the foot up to your right hand, and then to your left twice, and then you keep it in the air, and blow strongly on the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, by blowing and bringing the foot up: if it comes back, it is good; but if not, you begin the work again, for it will come back; and if he cannot come back like this, you make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a staff firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie the sheets around him so that he does not bleed; then you extend the healthy leg away from under the body with your hands or legs; then each minister extends evenly, and the staff is kept in place between the hips of the patient to hold the patient down while it is being extended; then the doctor who performs the dislocation holds it in his hands, and other ministers extend the injured leg away from under the body with their hands or legs; then you blow strongly on the foot, and do this twice: if it comes back, it is good; but if not, you begin the work again, for it will come back; and if he cannot come back like this, you make the patient lie on his side, and extend the injured leg away from under the body with your hands or legs; then you blow strongly on the foot, and do this twice: if it comes back, it is good; but if not, you begin the work again, for it will come back.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it has set, then put on the plaster and press it down, and form the splint, and fasten the leg to the foot, and guard the tendons behind the ankle so that the bonds are not too tight; then leave it for II days or III, and let the bonds become loose if the splint; then remove it by the third day or the fourth, and no longer let the patient walk for IV days; and if he walks before this term, it is not yet certain that he will still dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses come to a head, so that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is well.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so that they are nicely extended without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are in no way out of the two feet of the leg, then you make the patient sit on a plain or flat table completely upright, and put your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press it down forming, until he has recovered; and when it is even, and there is nothing more open, then set up the splint with II beams, then form the splint, and leave it for III days, then remove it; and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not learned in the art and have not long practiced it, and if you are not compassionate and tardy, do not be bold; and use at the beginning soothing remedies for the abscesses, and leave the patient in the hands of God, unless you see a chance for health; and when you see a chance, now restore the limb to its place, so that the abscesses come; and when the limbs are in their places, administer soothing remedies, and cure the wound as it should be, with ointments that dry it up; and if there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, then repair them, and do what we have said for simple illnesses; and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will lead you astray according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming and strengthening your body.
Amen	Amen
