O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, my very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, there remains little knowledge and understanding of it except for slight descriptions in books by the ancients which the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off and knowledge is kept distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Here it seems to me that I should animate it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hand are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who engages in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and of the veins moving and resting, and where their exits are.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hypocrites says that what is known by name is much, and what is known by action is little; and the same is true in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, must be careful that he does not make mistakes and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who lanced an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he also cut the arteries in the neck; as a result, so much blood poured out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out a part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another knight who was healing a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant healers applied the break on top of the wound using a strong pressure, and they did not leave any poultice on the wound, and they left it like that with one end; and he commanded that it should not be touched; and it stayed like that until the leg became completely swollen, and the foot too, and it came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to loosen the leg; and when I loosened it he felt at ease and had no more pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another knight who punctured an abscess that was encrusted and then inflamed due to the wickedness of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a ulcer, when it is pure of the black humor, one should not touch it with iron unless in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, dear reader, you need to know that the work of the hands is divided into two parts: that is, where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each section of this book where there is danger and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So it is necessary for you to be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Then take up your weapons in confidence, and approach your illnesses gently and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and remove your weapons from what causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may be able to come from this world to the other one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galen says in some of his warnings: "Do not disregard a serious illness lest you be called a foolish fool."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medicinal water cautery; it is the chapter ordered from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments, and about cautery tools, and all that is necessary in the craft.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twisting injuries, and similar ailments; it is arranged from the head to the feet, and concerns the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	So, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy discussion and subtle science, and the secret responses; and the majority of sages spoke about this and agreed on it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I prefer brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in all complexes where there is matter, whether .ij. complexes: namely, hot complex without matter, and dry complex without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, some people said that cautery is very helpful; others said the opposite, that cautery is not effective for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because fire's nature is hot, it should not be treated with heat or dryness; and those who say the contrary claim that cautery helps hot and dry diseases that originate in people's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body to be cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, one should not undertake this without first having experienced it themselves, and understanding through long practice the nature of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their outcomes and the timing; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians agreed and concurred about the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery combines fire with the secrets of cures, and is a greater good than burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not spread beyond the cooked member, nor harm any other member if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines spread from member to another in repelling fashion, and bring about the illness of a painful cure in the member; and by chance they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire because of its heat and because of the goodness of its substance does not hurt if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have discovered this through experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been placed under the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is reserved for fire, and the quality of the work, describing how it heals illnesses in bodies, as the philosopher explains through demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the underlying harm is removed by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for pressing pains that are sudden and urgent and cannot wait until a more convenient time.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish do; for a disease that is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and they say so, but it is not true as they believe, because cauteries are not medicines that move the complexions, and dry up the humors that cause pain, and are worth more than medicine for their swiftness and virtue and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease will sometimes return according to the complexion of the malady and its location and nature; and the excesses are assembled within it through the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered to remove the excesses and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when cauteries should be performed, and chose a favorable moment.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is evident; but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are milder than those of iron, and they said this because of the nature of gold and its high quality; and they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have tested and found to be the case in some men.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Nevertheless, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it is done in the fire, and so there is enough hindrance.Et quant tu chaufes estrument de fer, tu le sais bien a la calor que il est chaus por la noirceur del, et s’il n’est pas trop chaus il reste chaud longuement; si si li eschaude trop, il se rompt et n’a point d’empechement.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter on the head and neck, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	on olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types made for different causes: one for a condition called "soda", which is caused by various humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears; also for many ailments caused by coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by a purifying medicine, cleansing the head for three or four nights, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can bear; then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then let the patient sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his lap; afterwards, place the root of your palm between his eyes, where his nose bridges his two eyes, and heat up the cautery, which is called "olivare," with which this is done.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot, and move your hand up and down while rotating it; then lift your hand gently, and examine the spot to see if there is a small bone fragment; and if you don't see one, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed. Then take a little salt, put it in a piece of cloth, and place it on the spot; leave it for three days; then apply an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when an open wound persists for longer, it purges more, and for this reason, it helps to use leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery on long enough to burn a part of the bone, and then have the burned part of the bone cut out and cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should leave the cautery on so long as to burn away a piece of bone as large as a woman's thimble, in order for the humors to flow out; then the wound must be left open for a long time, and afterwards it is cured and seared.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not consider these two methods of cauterization to be good in every way, except in some people where there is a fear of fainting; and I would rather leave it untouched, for the shoulder is weakened by continued dislocations, as we see in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak from nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more saving and mild for me, and therefore I practice this method.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes throughout the head and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills for the sick, which are called 'cochie', as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they are given the cautery that we have mentioned before, but it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature, and is not too cold; then cauterize it with that cautery a little bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said before, and do .i. cautery in the place where one puts leeches; there is .i. place for which one uses cupping glasses; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain from this cautery than from the others, and I will speak about it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and it is .i. form:
dou cautere dou chief	The horns which are on the head of the sick person, if they are in their nature of coldness and dryness, and of bone-holding; therefore, one should make the cauteries that are placed on them subtle to the string of the ox, and subtle to the others that are mentioned above.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in the head there is sudden pain and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleansed with purifying medicines, and one has done the other remedies that I have said about diseases, and all this does not help; then you should do cauteries according to two ways, that is to say of medicine and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine with garlic is that you take a clove of garlic and remove the skin and wrap it in a piece of cloth, then make an incision where the pain is located so that you can place the clove of garlic underneath the skin; and when it has been placed, tie it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then untie it and move away from the clove of garlic, leaving the wound for two or three days; then apply a poultice of cotton soaked in butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound is healed, if you see that it is necessary, do cauteries with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cautery of fire is done in the following way. Heat the cautery, whose shape is as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the head is made in the shape of a claw with a small curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and remove your hand so that the artery does not blaze, which is forced out, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in wine vinegar, and apply it to the area for three days; then put wet cotton soaked in butter, and then heal the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this hemorrhoid with the cautery that is called "cultellare", which has a pointed tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this hemorrhoid, which is not old.
de emigraine	of hemorrhoids
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat hemorrhoids as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you must heat the cautery that is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and then sign on the painful area a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and stretch it so that you do not cover the artery and it reaches to the bone; and be careful of the mandible that mutes when one chews, and let the mute and spasms come to the patient, and be careful of the blood flow from the artery when it is covered, or covering has great fear and likewise for those who are unaccustomed and inexperienced; and leave the wound in mid-healing; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding of the artery when it is covered, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize them in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear persists from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments that we have described in the previous chapter, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, called 'point', which has this shape:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have punctured all around the ear that is sick, or both if the pain is in both, and then move a little above from the root of the ear where you have marked the place; and have .x. points around each ear; after cure the area until it is healed.Et se tu vois que la dolor ne se mute pas, poins tout le costé de l’oreille qui est contrainct de froit, et t’esloigne vers la racine; et si li dolors ne se mute, poins entor les  .ij. oreilles tant qu’il soit saine, car il adoncque deffaut de nature.
de la torture de la bouche	of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	[There is no need for cautery in those ulcers which are due to flux, as we have said in the sections on diseases; nor should cautery be applied to those that arise from dryness and inflammation of nerves.]
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of mouth torture that arises from flux of humors and discharges from the head, and gargling does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with . three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little way above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and cauterize the top of the ear just beneath the horn of the head, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery in place until half of the brain is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the knife is as we have described before, but it should be a little more flexible, and the knife itself should be a little thicker; afterwards, treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient has a fever, then do four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one where the spot called 'vassels' is located, as we mentioned earlier; and the last cautery is on the stomach's mouth. And let it be treated as we said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and purifying pills for the brain; then, shave the head of the patient all over, and apply a liniment of mustard to the back of the neck; and here is how to do the cautery: perform it as I have described.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed like this, it is good; and if not, do three cauteries in the middle of the head, descending to the neck, with a distance of two fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see the need, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him as before. And let it be the cautery called 'olivare', as I mentioned earlier.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hair and what we have previously mentioned; after shaving the head of the patient, then make cauterization in the middle of the head and on each temple, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you require more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after healing it until it is healed, and use the cautery that is called "olive" which we have mentioned earlier.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Those with epilepsy should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic; and first it is necessary to cleanse the brain of hair and other remedies that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffering, taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, make them gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meats; then the king's men take hold of his head, and they make .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the illness is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, upon the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the illness is in an infant, make 1 fine cautery according to this method
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with gentle cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining towards melancholy, and the body is moist due to the illness, then give them something to drink that will purify the brain according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After raising the head of the patient, make a well-fitting linen tortilla in the shape of a circle and place it inside the head; cross the linen and hold it tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment and smear old goat's butter on it; gently heat it over fire until the patient can bear its warmth; remove the linen from inside the head and let it cool down; do this for the patient once a week with good care until he recovers.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or, if you wish to cauterize the eye, make several small incisions with the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in butter and gelatine fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient a cleansing drink for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands him to look up, and cauterizes the head, and makes two cauteries on the two temples if the dislocation is in both eyes, or one if it is in only one; and stop all veins and arteries beneath the brain, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as well as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you the extraction of arteries and the incision of cauteries; and sometimes cautery or haters are done beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	of the body from weeping
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears in the eyes are old and habitual, and are upon the veins, or beneath the arteries that are on the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that this is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I said at the beginning of the eye: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or haters beneath the two bones; and if there is a need for more, then he cauterizes bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery all around.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where tears flow from inside them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of poultices; after that, shave his head, and cauterize him with the middle olive cautery; and make two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two sorces, one just under the hair; and be careful not to hit the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called  "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin around the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare." And this is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see two warts as long as the sorcerers are; and do not leave your hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that points towards the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted to the opposite direction, pointing towards the eye, and one performs cauteries according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then the patient should put their hand in warm water; next, draw on the paper a shape like the leaf of the myrtle, and have the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put wet cotton in egg white and wormwood over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it takes the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, cauterize the shape you drew bit by bit many times until the wound is burnt there; and the sign of the healing of the work is that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs rise at the tip of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for 3 days, then put wet cotton in lard as long as the scald is healed; then cure with ointment until it is cured.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow, and the paper becomes soft again, then begin the cautery in that same place again, as you did before; and if the hair is broken off, then cauterize it so that the paper rises to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine that burns is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even; then make a shape out of parchment like the leaf of the myrtle; then take equal parts of French soap and vitriol, and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of the myrtle, and place it over the hairs; and if the disease is in one eye only, then operate on one, and if in both, then on both; and put wet cotton in egg white underneath the eye; and let the patient's hand be in warm water, and place their finger over the medicine, and press it a little and move it each time the patient feels biting from the medicine, because they feel the biting as well as the fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the bite has passed, lift the area with a bandage, and check if you see the papery skin lifted as it was by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine had not worked, until your work is even and your eyes focused; then place wet cotton in butter on the burn until it cools, then treat the area with a salve called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get into your eyes, and the papery skin becomes soft after, and the hair grows in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the area which is softened by the papery skin properly, just as you did before; then treat it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle twig:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to this method.Take a cautery-iron that is medium-sized and flat on one side; heat it until it turns white-hot and place it against the fistula, holding it there until it feels as though it is burning the bone.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to tilt their head towards you; have an assistant hold the patient's head steady in such a way that it does not move or turn away from you. Then wet cotton with egg white or purslane juice and apply it to the eye. Heat the cautery-iron so that it is white-hot, and hold it against the eye in the shape of a tent, or if you prefer, in the shape of a pen-tip, pointed from one end to the other. But whatever shape you use, the cautery should be applied gently so as not to harm the patient's eye.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards, press on the fistula if it is open to drain it and then dry it off. If it is closed, then open it and draw out any pus. Next, apply the hot cautery-iron gently and hold your hand on the iron at the edge of the eye, taking care not to cause harm; place the cautery-iron in the fat around the eye and corrupt it there.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you reach the bone with the cautery at the start, that is good. If not, repeat the cautery again, and a third time if necessary, then leave it for three days; after which apply moist cotton on butter, and treat the wound with the drying ointment until it heals; and if forty days pass and it has not healed, apply an corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and the king according to what happens in his kingdom.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that some of the ancients said. Identify the fistula, and make an incision; after which place in the slit a thin piece of cotton with which is the formula:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of a bean's worth of plaster; and hold your hand or the cotton firmly, and do not move the patient so that the melting plaster does not run into his eye; and one must apply moist cotton to the patient's eye, made from walnut juice or from a mixture: the plaster melts the fistula, and heals it miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have described, that is good. If not, one must administer a poultice to the nostril, and bring the fistula back into the nose according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hair," especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly in the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, treat the site with cerotet until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess occurs in the root of the throat or the uvula, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, it creates swelling and rot and becomes a fistula; and you should treat it as we have described in the section on incisions, and if it does not heal: you must then reveal the site and remove the rotten bone according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't help, then put the head of the patient in your hand; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, repeat the cautery according to your desire; then fill the patient's mouth with salted water, and let them gag for an hour and release their phlegm.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was loose is now firm, the gums softened and restrained, and the corrupted moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	from dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is required: cauterization with butter, and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter: take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or brass; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the moistened cotton and butter cool off, heat up the iron again until the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cautery using fire is such that you grab a cane of iron or bronze, and it is thick enough so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, whose shape will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times, because the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter quickly during this cautery, and then rinse; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery on whichever tooth you want, according to what power you have; and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	from scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is due to cold dampness and is stubborn to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that afterwards the shape comes as mentioned, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from one side of the cautery to the other; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, so that it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, then use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for 3 days. Then treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the stomach, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must be purged first with solutive medicines; after that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware not to go any further up into the throat, but just scorch the heart slightly. After that, make another cautery at the joint between the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavicle', as described before; then treat the area as we have said until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the stomach are from cold moistors, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then make two cauteries on the chest in their usual places; and another cautery in between the breasts; using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, make a cautery at the tip with the cautery called 'poins', of which the form is given above in the disease of the ears; and let the points reach up to thirty or more. After that, treat the area as described before, and use three cauteries according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason are cauteries lighter, because you make them .iiij. times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, apply the cautery to his back and side; then lift the heart which is within the breast with your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has .ij. nerves of the duck's web where there is a lump:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the head until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery will come out with four cauteries; and for this reason there is a cautery made with a cautery which has three points, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves follow according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery which has three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted above that one nerve so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put the broiled porrells on the cautery; afterwards, let the patient rest, and the limb should not be moved for a long time until he is completely healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little can be done, so therefore make the cautery on the thickness of the clavi-bone cautery, or many cauteries in points. For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make cauteries for pleurisy from the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long, dry root of aristolochia, as thick and long as your finger; moisten it with oil, heat it in the fire, and cauterize .i. cautery between the sternum and collarbone, and .ii. small cauteries a little lower down on the part under the beard; and .ii. cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward; and .i. cautery in the armpit, and .i. another over the stomach, and .i. between the .ii. shoulders, and .ii. at the .ii. sides of the foot below the cautery that is between the .ii. shoulders; and do not press your hand hard, but do it gently as when incense-burning.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancients said that one should use a cautery of hot iron like  .i. razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and it leaps away from the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this procedure there is now fear for the patient's life, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you are treating the disease of the moon as we have said in the sections on treatment, and it does not help, then there are three ways of cauterizing which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, cutting according to the length of the moon, in accordance with the figure of the cautery of the liver which we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the whole cautery, but let the patient lie on his back carefully.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery which has two tips, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and press the cautery where the disease comes towards the left, or the armpit, and let the elevation according to which you lift the armpit be according to the armpit, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, put the two tips in flame until the armpit is pierced from the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and so there will be four of them. And if you want, cauterize with all the cautery with three tips. After the treatment, when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is as good as any of the other treatments mentioned earlier.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not effective for dropsy except in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in detail, and your treatment does not help, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the anus; and the cautery should be close to the base of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterward, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not cease treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be like the key we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of foot swelling
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, otherwise you will push out the yellow water, and the cautery should be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make 2 cauteries on each leg at the base of the toenail; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries in place for a long time without curing, until the water comes out; afterwards cure the others that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When there is an issue with digestion due to coldness and moisture, and the retentive and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and it cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and in great distress, then do as follows: make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was said before about the cautery of the stomach; and make four small cauteries around the abdomen with a slender rod for each cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see an abundance of moisture and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each shoulder blade, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the larger one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	on the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and filled with thick cold and moist corrupted humor, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is completely underneath the armpit, little by little in a triangular shape; and two cauteries under the abdomen.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swollen, then the face must be cauterized with a large cautery on the stomach, as already stated, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with a cautery all along the clavicle; and let the cautery remain for a long time. After that, cure the area until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul."
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you scrape the  "thelul," heat up the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on the scraped  "thelul"; keep your hand there so that the cautery comes to the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of  "thelul," cauterize each one as we have described. After that, cure them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the scrotum, it will provide more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of an uncured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its proper place, there comes such a disease that it cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is a fistula and it is swollen and suppurating with corrupt moisture, you should first test it with a thin probe to determine its depth. Then heat the cautery like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the probe entered; repeat the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the quantity of suppuration. Be careful not to burn any nerves or large vessels. If the fistula reaches the bladder and intestines, be cautious of these areas and do not apply heat to fleshy places, as this can cause harm; instead, think that it is not sensitive. Then cure the area until it is healed, and if the opening is sealed and the matter discharged for a long time, know that the fistula is completely healed. But if the matter is not discharged, understand that the fistula has pierced through to the bone at its base, and the bone is corrupted; and thus, as we shall say in its proper place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When frosty pain comes to the kidneys, and with great windiness, and it does not take the form of a woman, then you must cauterize him on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the lower part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, both on the right and left sides, and each cautery should be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery over the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be curved as described before.
de la marris	of the brain
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the brain is cold and moist, and unable to conceive, and the fluids are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then one should make 3 cauteries around the head, as we have said in the cautery for the bladder, and two cauteries over the back; and let the cauteries be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip joint and displace it due to this, the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and if the place of the displacement is found hollow, you should cauterize the malady on the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive oil, and let the cautery be as deep as all the scabs; and cure it until it is healed.Et si li boistes est trovez plis a l’un costé que a l’autre, covient que tu le cure de la partie qui est plus haute, et si le cure tant qu’il soit sanz dolor; et se il a grant dolor, si covient que tu le cure par petit pons, tant que li dolors s’esvaigent.
de la dolor de la hainche	And if the socket is found more on one side than the other, you should cure it from the part that is higher, and cure it until there is no pain; and if there is great pain, then you must cure it by little bridge, until the pains subside.Et se il a grant dolor, si covient que tu le cure par petit pons, tant que li dolors s’esvaigent.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the disease is cured of that which we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After that, let him cauterize; and the manner of cauterization is according to two methods: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many methods, among which one is such that you cauterize on the hip socket three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and there should be between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, let him be cauterized with the circular cautery that we mentioned earlier in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all of the hip, and all of the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, let him be cauterized where he feels the pain with two cauteries there, and one cautery above the ankle of the little toe on the left side a little; and let the cautery be cuticular, and let the thickness of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two of the toes or near them, let him be cauterized where he feels the pain with three or four cauteries, which are called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, use a cutaneous or circular cautery, and take great care with all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it on so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot. Afterwards he died from a belly-ache.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, do cautery on one and then the other according to this method. // And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip joint, of which here is the manner: make one iron tool that has at its head as much width as a thumb nail, or a little less, and it should be smooth between the teeth, and from one tooth to another there should be the distance of a thumb nail; and they should have teeth on both sides, and it should have a good handle. And this is how it should look:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should be heated until it is bright red and smoking, and then applied to the hip joint of the affected side, and turned to the healthy side; and the cautery iron should be applied once for each cautery, and then left for three days. And then use an ointment of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after that, treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly due to fear of its appearance, and although we see few who use it, it is one of the good cauteries which those who can endure it should employ wherever they need it.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact, or from excessive evacuation, or from similar cold matter spreading, none of these indications warrant cautery except in the case that arises from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after the patient has been bled of foul pills or similar, to apply an ointment over the back where the pain is, in three parallel lines, and in each line .v. cauteries, or more according to the strength and amount that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed using the cautery called «point», and if you see fit, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. using the medium-sized cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a stiff neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find in the last spine in the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and cure it, then cauterize it with a cautery of celandine according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the cautery purples every part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery .ij. or .iij. lines long, and let the points be close to each other. After curing the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cautery in a swollen area which is on a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moistors that are spread throughout the body's limbs, and when it comes in the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be healed with medicine, then it is cured through cauterization in this way: make the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is a need for you to cauterize on the face of the foot, do it with the entire "point" cautery. And if pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize every knee with 3 or 4 cauteries in each part, all with olive-colored cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand against it for longer than the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then do 2 lines around the wrist; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then do cauteries on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize every part, and practice good care for the patient and take medicines. For if you practice good care for him and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the root of the tongue
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a hernia occurs in the groin and the testicles descend into the scrotum, it is newly formed. So when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces will exit his abdomen; then have him sit on his back between your hands and command him to hold his breath until the hernia is repaired, and then pull it back into your hands. Sign with your finger underneath the hernia over the bone of the groin, and throughout a sign that resembles half a circle on top of the body; then heat up the cautery which has this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and dripping with pus. Then pull the hernia back into place; and the minister should hold his hand on him so that it doesn't return; and treat the groin well for the patient, and put a cushion underneath him and a servant on each thigh, and another one on his feet who holds his hands; then put the cautery over the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep holding it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone. Be careful that the hernia doesn't pop out when you're using the cautery so that you don't burn him; and through this the patient won't die or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And you should know that when you don't reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and those for large people also according to their size; after 3 days, cure the area around the cautery with butter until the burns are healed; then cure it with other ointments until it's healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days so that the wound is well sewn up. And the hair should be cut short for a long time so that the hernia doesn't pop out when he stands up and walks around.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, he should be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for .xl. more days; and he should have good rest, doing little work and avoiding excessive eating and drinking, and too much loud talking; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I will now describe the treatment of cutting in his head.
de la routure dou ventre	of abdominal hernia
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When hernias occur in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they are not growing anymore, then make .j. cautery with the cauterized iron according to its quantity, and burn it in the third part of the heart; after the cure, according to what we have said. Some of the ancients say that one must cautarize it with the three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first sign the point of entry and draw a line over the breadth above the hernia, and another from the side, and hold your hand in the middle of the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and easier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any limb, from falling or from injury, and the pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then cauterization with the cautery called "point" is needed, and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torque and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, do another cautery on top of that one, for such custom is that it must change in the limb nearest to which it is, so you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The boils are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, and so are diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not discharge or remain, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the body, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 on the crown of the head, and another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and 1 behind on the nape of the neck; and let your hand be so that the cautery comes to the bone, and as long as the skin pops out so that the vapors of the gross humors can come out; and cauterize on the mole according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it is clearly losing strength, then you should cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned: one cautery on the head, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery on the groin, and another smaller one, two cauteries on the shoulders; two cauteries on the ears, two cauteries on the tendons of the feet, one cautery on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel so that you do not burn them; and sometimes a cautery is placed on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you should know that the more cauteries you perform, the more help it will bring, and it will benefit more; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because their body is already corrupted. And the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what you find in the ways of the irons. After that, treat the site with flour made from wheat with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it does not heal, then cauterize the limb according to its size; the cautery should be a little hot in the depth of the wound. Then treat it with ointments until it heals. Sometimes cauterization is done on the hand, foot, back, or where the nerve that moves the limb emerges; thus, the swelling is removed. But no one should attempt this unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the emergence of nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of poplars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a moderately deep cautery according to the thickness of the wound until the whiteness is removed and the color changed; then treat it with an ointment made of equal parts wheat flour and lentil flour, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as colon blood and almond blood. Mix everything together and apply it, covering it with a cloth and exposing it to air until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of ulcers by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And yet the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the chancre; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen this happen more than once; and a more straightforward thing is to cauterize around it, using the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease that is called  "adubelati", and it is slow to heal, either due to the excess fluid it produces, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old), and they have little blood, or because of the season; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries, piercing in; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery with which it is formed:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it leaving in such a way that the course of the pustule is relieved. After the cure, until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another type of disease is called "corrodens", which is simply a corrosion or rot of the limb, for it rots the limbs just like fire burns dry wood. If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cauterization with fire, then heat the cautery tools, both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the disease; then cauterize all over until you reach all the corruption and none remains. Then leave it for three days, and apply ointments to the cauterized areas to soothe the burns and remove any remaining corrosion or rot. After three days, if new healthy flesh appears, that is good; but if not, then re-cauterize where the corruption still remains. This type of disease can sometimes be treated with medicine instead of fire cautery; however, cauterization with fire is generally more effective. I have already described the treatment for this in the section on medicine: apply it as needed.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of sores that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that in the feet, due to dampness, a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises, and it is a thick, misshapen thing that blisters the foot. The cautery for this disease is according to two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery as hot as a feather, as though it were a pen, made of good iron to the measure that it can press against the nail on all sides, and that it has thin edges; then place it completely hot on the nail and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make a poultice of crushed mallows with salt and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. Then heal the place with ointment, gently, until it is cured.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted on the body, and many times they occur in the hands and feet, you should apply hot water cautery; and it is done thus: take a brass or iron rod, or a pen, and place it on the nail and the callus, that is, warts; then place the rod so that it wraps around, and pour a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly and press your hand as you turn it so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail and can find the hot water a deep path to the root. Then let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Thus do one after another until you extract all those on the body, then heal them with ointments that promote healing.
li cure dou trembler	trembling cure
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone is shaking from coldness in their nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], one should make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each vertebrae; and one cauterization on the penis, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; thus will it stop the shaking, and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes they appear as boils or stinking pustules, which come from putrid humours. One should cauterize the top of each pustule at the first sign of their appearance: with a thin stick made from myrtle wood, the tip having been heated in the fire, or with a long piece of aristolochia root, or with a lentil-shaped cautery. Sometimes they are also cauterized at the beginning, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further afterwards; the superfluous matter from which they came is disrupted, and they are healed; but this should be done after bloodletting.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great bloodletting from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and in similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you should quickly put your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it hard until the blood is quietened beneath your finger, and no drop comes out; then take several olive-wood cauteries, both large and small as the wound and the location where the artery is running, and apply the cautery to that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the blood spurts out when you lift your finger from the wound and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is staunched; and be careful that you do not harm the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be staunched well by itself when the artery is large, except by one of four methods that we have described: by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligature, or by medicines put on which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and compressed skillfully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers a tight bandage or places hot objects on it, or similar things, will not benefit much if at all.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, then one should put their index finger on the wound as we have said, and press hard until it feels tight on the wound; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and swollen and tight; and make inquiries beforehand about what cauteries and medicines are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of wound treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require cautery by fire or burning medicine, and the oedemas and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I included that chapter from head to foot, and I will go through this chapter in the same way so that one may more easily find what they are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is fitting, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and therefore greater care is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to be foolish. For people come to cures in many ways: some are so worn down by their illness that they would quickly die of the strain if they were cured, and because of the greatness of their illness; one must fear for such people.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And among these there are some who regain their senses and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is relentless. You should not give in to such people, but hold your honor dearer than your desire, and do not act foolishly but wisely in what you know for certain, and from which you can expect gain and reward; and use prognostication and indication in curing illnesses where safety lies. This will help you attain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease comes very often to children when they are born, and when the baby's head is squeezed too tightly; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in adults, and in all cases I have witnessed, death has resulted; therefore, it seems best to me not to treat it in this manner.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled every day until he could no longer bear it; and the moisture accumulated under the bone above the brain, between the heart and the bone. If the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should split the head open widely in the middle, making an incision as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out. See the figure of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the pocket of moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, as shown in this figure:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening up in each part, and water squirts out when you press it with your hand from the inside, and it does not close back up again, then you must split open the head in four places in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, draw out all moisture with force. After that, close up the fissures with bandages and powders, pour wine and oil on it, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound with tenting and ointments, and let the head be bound tightly, and give the patient dry meat to eat, as much as he can take with a little moisture, until the limb is healed and well.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to examine where the aperture of the abscess is located, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus gathers, and make the incision according to what you can do; but be careful not to cut an artery, for then there will flow a stream of blood, and the patient will die from bleeding and evacuating moisture.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away from you; then rub the area around the eyes with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then squeeze the patient's neck all around with a 1-inch wide bandage; then look where the vein bleeds, and the spots are after the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the spots inside with a sharp spatulum, then cut both with a 2-part spatula so that the vein bleeds up to the bone, and this should be done from the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, insert the spatula under the artery and cut it from above, cutting also about 2 inches across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow upward continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the amount of the space of three fingers, and then cut in and slash up to the bone; and the amount of blood let out should be about six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can tolerate, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if nothing of the syphilis remains above the bone, and the heat of the abscess does not come, then extract the wound and ligature it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of emetics
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient vomiting comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes, and heat in the temples, and old madness, and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine but none of it helps him, then we should open the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient pulls back the hair on his temples, and feels the artery in the temple, which opens clearly by its pulsation, and is little relaxed towards some people who are too cold; and if it is relaxed, the patient stretches his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and sprinkles the area with warm water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatulum, of which there is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then lightly scorch the skin until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with tweezers, and carefully separate the fibers underneath in each part; and if the artery is slender, return it to the tip of the fingernail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw the blood out for a quarter of an hour to three hours; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come before the wound heals, and let the blood flow gently; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with an iron cautery to the bone until the shoulder is cut through; and this is the best treatment if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is helpful in drying out moisture; for this reason, it is even more useful for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is fitting for the extraction of arteries that one fills the wound with old cotton and puts on well-made bandages; and when they are removed, one should apply dry medicines that cause a blister to form, and also use bandages, until it is healed; and if without cutting into the artery as much as you work at it, then hasten to cover it with a cautery, or employ vitriol and hold it in your hand so that the blood is scorched; and if you do not have that at hand, then put vinegar on the wound so that the blood congeals, and moisten the wound with cold water so that the blood ceases, and bind it as it should be; and what is best and gentlest for the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery of two parts, but the cutter must be quite thick in order to retain its heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it holds its heat less well.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the space between the two knives should be a finger wide, and when you have cut into both sides and placed the hot iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and closed the vein in two places; and the two heads should be kept apart because they are not joined by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears flow from the veins that are on the top of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and there is trembling as if from fear; and when the eyes are sunken and moist so that the eyelids have fallen, and the eyelids are scorched and burnt by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it "cure contused," and you do to the patient who has this disease, that you cut the hair on the forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions is as two fingers everywhere in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two are at two sides above the eyes, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are at the sides above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the extension of the two jaws, and each wound is the width of three fingers across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have ready a piece of sponge and clean cloth to wipe away the blood, then pour into the wound the spathumile made from two parts of what it is made from;
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is by the temple all the way to the second incision; and scorch all the skin between the two incisions up to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision all the way to the other second one, and then pull out this spathumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Then pour into the first incision the instrument that is called "cultellare," which is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and it is shaped like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the incision towards the chest and the armpit, and the lower incision towards the bone, and tie it so that it comes to the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eye until the incision is continuous up to that which opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other defiant; and then draw out the blood equally, and express the site of the blood taken; then put into each incision a tent of old cotton, and place wet fabrics soaked in wine, oil, and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses coming there; and on the third day loosen the ligature, and administer a large amount of warm water, and then cure with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has a sudden catarrh, and you see the eyes are red and small, and the vision is weakened, and the eyelids burnt, and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that this matter and these catarrhs do not come from anywhere but from many veins, and the medicine that cures it is here.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you should command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another one from the left temple to the right, cutting down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerve endings in the temples that control movement in the face. When the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack the two lips of the slit with old cotton and linen bandages. Then apply dampened sheets soaked in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid hot abscesses. Once it is healed, you should rub the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with healing poultices that promote the growth of new flesh.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice out of it; administer it to wounds to promote the growth of new flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	on the treatment of ear infections:
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears are one of four things: grains, animals, rocks, or similar objects such as iron; seeds such as peas, beans, and lentils; and fluids such as water, garlic, and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When there is an object in the ear that does not adhere to the ear or grow within it, hold the ear towards the sun. If you can see the object, apply some violet oil or oil of nard, and then remove it with a pair of fine tweezers. Make the patient sneeze by administering a snuff, close their nostrils when they sneeze, and place pieces of linen or wool around the ear. This method often works, and if it does not, then removal should be performed with delicate tweezers, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, all the better; if not, then perform extraction with a small, thin hook made of fine wire; and if it still does not come out, make an iron hook and insert its tip firmly into the ear canal, then pack the space around the hook with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the hook. Then pull it out forcefully, for often it comes out in this way as we have said; but if it does not come out like this, take some bird glue and attach to it a tool made for this purpose, and place some cotton wool around it. Then press the glue onto the object, whether it is a stone or something else, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out with all the things we have mentioned, then you must split the ear so that pus and heat may come out, and there will be spasms; and the manner of splitting is to first make the patient lie down on his back, and draw blood from the head according to its strength, then hold the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear where the fat hangs, so that the cut is shaped like a crescent moon and reaches the object. Then remove it with your fingers, and suck on it vigourously with your mouth until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer an enema; and if it cannot exit, then administer a suppository with a thin rod according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In acute ear infections, the patient should use a warm compress and pack the ear with soft cotton. They should lie on their side with the affected ear facing up. If the fluid drains out due to gravity, that is good. If not, they should take small stones according to the size of their finger, heat them slightly over fire, and place one end in the ear and the other end in the fire; and they should hold the stone in place with their finger until the fluid drains out completely, as we have said for the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of a foreign object, if it is a small body such as a louse or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, administer an enema with tweezers; and this is the easiest way to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment is not effective, then you should examine the ear in the sunlight. If there are any worms, pull them out with fine tweezers; if there are none, take a cane, and where the shadow falls is where the worm will be.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow below and wide above. And insert the thinnest end of the cane into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the condition; then suck firmly on the cane; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out. If they do not come out, stop up around the cane with cotton as I said before for stones; and if they do not come out as we have described, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective against worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations. Distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, where the shadow falls is where the worm will be, as you can see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or brass with small holes below and openings above for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a well-crafted brass instrument for this purpose. Take a razor and wrap cotton around the end; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever else you want from your medicines, into the cane, and let the cane be in the ear. Then fill the razor with cotton all around, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warmed over fire so that it is not too cold when distilled into the ear, for the medicine would not be as effective then.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an opening in their ears; and this same thing happens to adults through the plugging of a wound or of pus within the ear, and sometimes these plugs come out of the ear, so one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only a little plug, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it comes out of the ear and one cannot see it, it is a matter of concern in various situations, and in such cases, one should put the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane exposed, then treat it according to its shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And if it is sharp and pointed in front and behind, all plain, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is of pus or from the body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and gently scrape it, until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the growth is deep in the ear, take a thin, lightweight razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the growth which causes the patient great pain when they hear, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a plug in the ear according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is closed, or take a plug and moisten it in rosewater, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see swelling in the ear, you should remove the plug and replace it with another moistened with an ointment made of olive oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then clean the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is bleeding, take a sponge and dip it in cold water, and apply it to the ear, and use other remedies that stop the bleeding which come from the distilling of fluids.
de la char des papieres	of paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ointment comes from papers when they are moist and dry; you should then extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from its roots; then place powdered vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no hair in it, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and the cautery after the incision is done; and many times they return, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times they come in papers with things that look like hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hailstone", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is as follows: take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and it is a small thing to know; then open it with tweezers, and peel it from each part gently, and then grab it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not trouble the patient; and if the crack is large, make a stitch in it, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it at once and heal it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending within the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and press it with pincers; and if the paper is removed by incision, that is not harmful; and when the stone is crushed, then wash out the ear with salted water, and treat the passage where the pus flows until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat which is woven into the papers above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it is very painful for their eyes; and they get the discharge in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes. And so they lie on their faces at night, and sleep with their eyelids underneath, which become swollen and covered by the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, it comes out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the treatment is that the patient puts his head on the operator's lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers on both sides so that the exirnach gathers inside the circle. Then cut through the moist skin with a spatula, making an incision no larger than the wound made for vein opening; and in various cases, the exirnach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove then with your hands a piece of cloth between them to the rear, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to press on the fissure so that you do not go all the way to the sphincter muscle up to the eye, lest you injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the hernia appears at the beginning of the fissure, press the fissure gently until it opens; then pull it as we have said, and moisten with water and cloth, and place on the site, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who sweat and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat the hernia until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the site, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et se li est ains disloiez, si covient il que tu le ramonies et que li remmes a son leu; car li chiés de l’ajutoire ne puet demorer en son leu si com nos avons dit.
des poilz des papieres	And if it is dislocated, then you must reset it and return it to its place; for the head of the shoulder cannot remain in its place as we have said.of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from paper, different from nature, and are ingrown, they harm themselves and cause various diseases, such as tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes. The cure follows four methods: through cautery with fire, or with a medicine water according to what is described before the chapter on cautery; it can also be done through incision and suturing or with caustic, according to what I will describe.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are growing out of place, and thread  a single thread through the eyelid, going over the edge of the paper, and draw the thread all the way to the top of the eyelid. Then, in the part below the eyelid, below the misaligned hairs, cut into the skin with a spatulum, starting from the large tear duct up to the small one. Remove the thread, and place a small tent made of cotton and fabric beneath the eyelid, then draw a figure-eight shape on top of the eyelid, like a myrtle leaf, and adjust the shape according to how much you want to lift the divided eyelid.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if it is necessary to lift a large amount of the eyelid, according to how soft the paper has become, then cut into the skin with the spatulum along the two lines you marked, starting from the large tear duct up to the small one. Let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs, about the thickness of a hair root, then insert the hook in one of the corners of the wound and lift it all up; then, let the other incision be on the opposite side, and assemble the two edges with a single thread of fine wool through an needle, and tie off the bleeding and trim the excess thread above the two eyebrows using any sticky substance you like; if not, ignore it. Then, leave the sutures and threads in place for three to four days; then remove the sutures and treat the wound with dry, astringent substances. The eyelid will recover quickly without sutures (as the ancients say), and this method is less frightening.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is just like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told you, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then copy what is above, with small letters evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you don't have the strength to hold the tweezers and it is not even, then take a needle with which you will sew, and the first thread through the large vein, and the second thread through the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told you, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing it up, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes the paper fibers are reversed; so you must use what we have said about the incision, but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of warts is as follows: convert the paper and place it inside according to what I have said; then make two warts by art, and two thin threads as long as the width of the spathamile; then cut two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly over what is above the wart, and pull the two warts out from their roots; and let them be thus for some days, and the skin that was pulled will die and harden and fall off as it becomes dry.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is slow in coming off, then treat the wart until it is healed; and when the wound has closed and the paper has lifted, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two warts that you should make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	the tools are such that you pierce with a thin needle and thread into the skin, and tie the two heads together subtly, and let the length of the thread be about a palm; then prepare in the case a second thin silk thread, and tie the heads of the threads; then place the patient's head in your hand; and let it be in the sun so that the treatment is revealed, for it is a subtle and small treatment, then pierce the needle all the way into the skin along with the natural hair until you draw it up through the paper, and then draw out the hair to just inside the case, and tie in the case that hair, whether there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs are drawn taut against the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall treat the wound underneath to the full extent that you have ordered, until the wound comes out from the opening above and you see it with your eye; then you shall treat the wound and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated, and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the eye's pustule
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "alacrity" or the pustule comes to the eye, there are two ways it can happen: natural and unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment is that you split the swelling, and loosen the eyelids, and put in it tents of linen, and leave it until it is healed; and one must not use in its cure anything that dries and restricts. For if you do, the disease will become worse than before; but one should use emollient things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and seeded, and a poultice of linseed, and the cure of these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you must be careful that it does not fuse according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are not remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the meat that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease which is under the true name of "axacrati", and are natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and tears and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you take a needle, with which there is a double thread, and pierce it into the flesh, and make it pass through from the left tear duct so that the threads come out on both sides of the eye; then the flesh is pulled up above to the very needle, and the skin is cut open by about half a spathum wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and cut 2 slits on each side within the paper; and the edges of the 2 slits on the sides of the incision which you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which has the number "1" in Greek; then remove that flesh, according to the amount that its sides are cut under, from what follows the paper, then join the 2 separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then cure it as we have said with softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or a wound or cautery, then you must make a plain slit underneath the hairs of the scrotum, and according to what is stated above; then separate between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an instrument with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the scrotum
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suddenness occurs in many men in such a way that the scrotum above is suddenly cut off from the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore push the point of a razor underneath the scrotum and lift it upwards; and press it with tweezers, until you grasp what is open in the spurge plant, which is neither too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient cannot bear the spurge plant too sharply cutting the eye; and make your incision, by which you scrape away this union, lightly, so that the scrotum returns according to its natural form; and all of this union is healed, and they sometimes produce a sore in the eye, and moisten it with soft wool; then place a tent of linen between the scrotum and the eye, and place moistened wool on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the poultice and the soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that there are two types of nail: one is nervous and resembles a hard cyst; the other is not nervous but looks like congealed white moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched with tweezers, cannot be removed; both kinds originate at the outer corner of the eye, grow little by little, and eventually cover the entire field of vision, along with the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the technique of the incision is that the patient should place their head towards you, then open their eyes; and hold the paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it out; then take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair through it, double over the tip of the needle a little, and insert it into the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it out, then cut away all along the side of the nail where the eyelid follows the eyelash, up to the root of the eyebrow, with the scissors very carefully and gently, leaving the natural skin of the eyelid so that the incision does not affect the tear ducts; sometimes only the edge of the nail is stretched out and tied with a thread, as we have said; then cut it away all along the eyelid where the eyelash grows up to the root of the eyebrow.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the scissors do not touch and tear the fleshy membrane, or pierce the eyelid; after the incision, put a little powdered chalk in the eye, and place a collar of lint around it, and leave it until the next day; then clean the eye as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle in, and the hooks cannot enter it, many times this kind of nail is cured by medicines; and they are born like I have described in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the malady, and take the spatule gently, poke little by little according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it is not decreasing and the pus is pushing out, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red copper, and seal the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin the work again as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with a hook and cut away a part and not all, so that no body of tears comes to it; then distill into the eye red collar made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	In some people's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows over the pupil, covering it and pressing against the eyelids, and it turns inward, resembling a rosebud. The treatment is for the patient to press his forehead against something solid, then open his eyes wide, and hold them that way while the doctor cuts away the flesh with small knives suitable for the task, working carefully; he then cuts away the first layer of flesh, continuing to cut until all the excess tissue is removed, taking care not to hurt the eye during the procedure. The incision should be made using a spatula, as described in the section on incisions for fingernails and other small areas, where we also mentioned how to remove the subcutaneous tissue, as demonstrated in this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Once the incision is complete and all the excess flesh has been removed, apply eye salve made from sealing wax or similar corrosive medicines, and place a cotton pad over the eye, keeping it in place with egg white, so that the hot abscess is secured; if there is nothing left behind and the pain persists, you are dealing with a hot abscess, so leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your treatment when the eye is healed, and continue in this manner for any further occurrences.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should always take care to treat weak eyes with natural remedies and accidents with iron tools; never insert your hand into an eye during treatment if you can help it, until you see that the patient is suffering from that particular treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	They are red veins that are covered over the eye, and they disturb vision and weaken the eye all day. So therefore, in the first place, you should examine the eye to see if there is anything else wrong with it apart from the red veins; then heat the eye gently according to your judgement, and the eyelids too, very gently, according to this method: instruct the patient to lower his head, then gently press the veins all around the eyelid, very gently, according to your judgement.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And two more in the .i. lid, very gently, according to this method:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you press those veins gently, and draw out the blood drop by drop after each other, as much as you can, until you have removed the veins from the eye; and be careful not to hurt the eye with the points of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that you do not leave anything behind from the red veins. And when you have finished, distil into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the red veins.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with soothing substances for the pain of them, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the hot abscess is secured, then begin again according to the method described earlier until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Look closely at 'arissati' fistula: when you heal it with cautery and medicine that burns according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a gap in the eye where you cut into the abscess, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then it returns to all its instruments so that this is the form; and it is called a  'sharp chief', and should be made to grind down from there to the tip, and be pointed like a file as it is in the current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the site of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while until you feel that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the wound is closed and healing occurs within 40 days, and no new abscess forms, and no bad accident happens, you may know that it has healed; but if not, there is nothing else to do except open the fistula again at the site of the nose according to this form: then uncover the bone a second time with iron and with sharp medicines, and when uncovered, pierce it with a needle according to this form, and let the iron rod have three angles, and the shank be tapered to a point as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then put it on the bone below the eye socket and move your hand away a little, then pierce it again with the needle until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it through his nose, for the blood within flows out if he holds his hand over his nose; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the matter dries up and hardens, go to the nose. This is a lighter procedure for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are fully open all around and there is no disturbance to the eye or a decrease in vision, then you should ligate the patient; then bandage him, then place leeches on him without piercing the skin to draw out the blood, then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla to the eye, and then bandage it with strips of linen according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten the bandage from above with a hard strip, and repeat the use of leeches without piercing the skin; then remove the leeches and leave the eye bandaged day and night, and if the ligature becomes loose, you should tighten it; then remove the ligature after a day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, that is good; if not, then repeat the ointment and the bandages and the ligature and the leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the rupture of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in a woven fabric, it opens and looks like a grain of resin, and is frightening to see. Therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you pierce an needle into the root of the part below up to the part above; then pierce another needle where there is a double thread in the part of the armpit; and tie one end of the double thread around the fabric, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and apply a soft linen to the eye; and leave it until the thread breaks with the fabric, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed. Sometimes the wound is constrained by the fabric on each side in a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce them with a sharp spatulum which comes through the bottom of the eye, and cut away the white moist membrane and lower the eyes, and enter in at once; then extract it until he is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowels of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease called "alkunati" is nothing but a bowel that has gathered in the eye, resembling water, but it is not; and the manner of its appearance when working is to make the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then hold his head with your hands from both sides and move him so that you see the bowel coming above your eyes; then let it settle there and be removed from the light source, and the patient sees things as he used to. If it does not go under, know that it is water, and if the distention of the bowel is not apparent as we have said, make the patient sit between your hands, then take the sharp spatulum and pierce through the conjunctiva and the cornea in one spot along the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea until the bowel comes out; and when it is issued, distill warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and mixed with honey, into the eye, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearance of the ailments in the division, and what is needed to pierce; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that the sun does not harm his healthy eye, and tie it very tightly; then place the paper over the eye with your left hand if the eye is on the left, or your right hand if the eye is on the right; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eye is on the left, or your left hand if the eye is on the right; then place the tip of the instrument along the edge of the eyelid in the part where the tear duct is located, and then carefully insert the instrument called "almagda" into the eyelid, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the eyelid, and feel when "almagda" reaches the empty space; and the depth of the path of "almagda" should reach the bottom of the space between the pupil and the edge of the iris; this is the coronal part of the eye; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the horn-like cornea, and then insert the instrument all the way to where the ailment is, and express it from one path to another. If the ailment drains now, the patient will see in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, if the ailment returns through the second path, insert the instrument and when it is firmly stuck and not rising, gently withdraw "almagda" by turning your hand slightly; then put in a little seal gem oil and remove the instrument from the eye. Then apply to the affected eye a poultice of comfrey with plenty of egg yolk, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those of our time, place on it ground comfrey with plenty of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if  "almagda" cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small slit, then pour in alum, as we have said; and when the work is complete, prepare for the patient a dark room where he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free of all movements, and eat light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the operation or after the incision now, but you should ease this, so that the water rises gently.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And if a hot abscess comes, remove the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes an abscess; and when it is soothed, then remove the sight and put on his face a bandage to cover one eye, and let him be in that dark room again. And then go out of the house a little bit at a time, and turn around in his case; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iraq who told us that in his land they pierce with alum, and they suck out the water, but nonetheless I have never seen anyone in our land doing this, nor have I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.Et si en cest cas vees que li membres soit engourdis, tant qu’il ne se mueent point, si doit on le fere aler adés sus quelque membre ou autrui; mais s’il se mueit quelque chose, si convient il que tu le tiennes par force et le faisses aler au repos; et s’il est en tel cas que li membres soit entortuit ou qu’il se tordent l’un sur l’autrui, si doit on les tordre ains que les os se remettent a lor leu, et s’il sont tortus en telle maniere que les os ne puent venir a lor leu, si convient il que tu rompis li membres ou la jointure.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almucad, for those who do not know them will see it; and they are properly made of copper:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the heads be of this same subtlety, and the hindmost have three pointed ends.
de la char sor le neis	of the ear near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Sometimes they grow on the ears as diverse warts, some of which look like scorpions with many feet; and others have a dark colored wart, and some have a light colored wart. So for those warts that are light colored and not dark, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun; open his nose, and drop the fluid on the wart, and pull it out; then, as much as you can withstand with a sharp needle from one side, until you know that the wart is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it with a very subtle instrument lightly so that nothing is left behind; and if without swelling, cut the abscess as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the corruption is removed, then apply cold water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose works and moisture comes up to the palate, you know it is healthy; and if the moisture does not break through as it should, you know that there is corruption in the bone above, so do not use instruments for cutting; instead, tie a piece of linen thread, fairly thick, around the nose, and tie it between each nostril, with a space of one or two fingers; and let the patient hold the end of the thread in his mouth to his greatest ability, and draw it through the odorant until it comes out through the nose; and many children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out through the nose in one hand, and the other end that comes out through the mouth in the other hand, and pull them gently one after the other while holding your breath. Do this until you know that the thread has corroded the corruption, then remove the thread, wipe away the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything left of the corruption; then put a plug in the nose made of plaster for several days until it is healed, and if medicine is needed to dry it out, use it. This is the instrument used to purge the head through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or bronze, shaped like an open lamp, with a spout; and if you want, make a closed one, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and there should be a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart over the navel
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called «telul» arises at the top of the navel and grows and becomes large, so that it is visible to the eye; therefore one should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place upon it the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting until it has become large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron, for it is an ulcerated abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to a superficial touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the site with dry and constrictive substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the navel is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when a rupture of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it does little good except in some men. Therefore, whenever this happens to anyone, examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then bring together the .ij. lips with one suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are separated on either side, then you should cut all parts of their skin until they heal, then bring together the .ij. lips with a single suture, tighten them, and apply powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and place upon the powders a piece of strong plaster or other adhesive plaster, and leave it to heal by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you prepare the thread: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the mouth there are hard abscesses within the lips, resembling peas, small and large; therefore you must open the lips and slice through each pustule with a knife, and then grip them with tweezers and scrape away at each one; next apply powdered vitriol to the incision, until the blood is stanched; then use garlic and treat the area with dry remedies until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of gum tissue
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a tumor grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albus"; you should hold it with tweezers, cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out; then apply crushed vitriol or other drying and constricting powders to the area; if the tumor returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cautery. These are the forms of tumors to be cut.
des sordens	of disorders.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are attached to the roots of the teeth, in the mouth between the gums, and appear as ugly and rough growths; sometimes the teeth themselves become black, green, or yellow, as corruption spreads to the gums, and they emit a foul odor; you should have the patient lean forward so that his head is between your hands and his teeth are visible to you, then pick at the growths or discoloration until nothing remains; likewise with black, green, or yellow stains, clean them off completely; if they come off at first attempt, all the better; if not, repeat the process the next day or the day after, until everything is removed; know that teeth require different types of instruments for cleaning, depending on what the condition presents, so that the scrapers used to clean between the teeth have different forms from those used to clean the teeth themselves; these various forms and others should be prepared and ready.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When treating a toothache, you should not rush, but take as much time as possible, for there is no excuse for causing pain during the procedure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then, when the patient is forced to draw breath, you must be certain which tooth hurts. Often pain in the jaw leads one to believe it is a sound tooth that hurts, and so one draws air through the good tooth; yet the pain does not go away because of this as long as the bad tooth remains, for we have already tried this with these patients; and when you are quite certain which tooth hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all the way to the gum; then spit out strongly in order to push up the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or delicate pincers a little at a time until it is well loosened; then grip the pincers firmly; and have the patient's jaw between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Then draw the tooth out straight without breaking it, and if it will not come out, take one of these instruments and insert it into each side gently, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the hole with lint; and hold it tightly with the pincers so that it does not break when you are pulling it; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often brings greater pain to the patient due to the root remaining, and also be careful not to do as ignorant surgeons do, who often in their haste and arrogance break the tooth, and do not heed what we have told you; but sometimes bring about great illness through the hole made by pulling out the tooth, or by breaking the jaw, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the socket with wine or garlic and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply powdered vitriol to the socket; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shape of the instruments with which you pluck out teeth first should have long points and broad handles so that they do not break when you pull on the tooth. The shapes are:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of strong material so that they do not bend when pulling, and made of good iron, and have teeth to hold the gums.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in place while pulling, you should put wet cotton on the area for one or two days until the gums soften. Then use forceps called "algefri", which resemble a surgeon's jaws; and they should be made like a file, and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these tweezers, then you should uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is to say a spatula, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and wide so that it does not break, and if the root pops out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the shapes come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should use this instrument with two edges, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in the reason of teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong enough that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master finds his own instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach an instrument because of their diversity; and if it does not break in the cart or other bones, or it protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and aids with gestures, by which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and strong enough to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then cut it with all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down; then pull it out; and if there is an abscess with the tooth, then take this instrument of which the form is like a small beak, and let it be made of tempered iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And pluck it gently several times a day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with one part of this file as shown in the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime with which needles are made; and in lime the tooth little by little in the hand, so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth it at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pierces the tongue, it should be filed down so that it is even and does not pierce the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the front teeth loosen, through blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on anything he eats without it slipping out, and you have treated them with binding medicines to no avail; then they must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves. The wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth. And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and bend it double between two healthy teeth; then put the hook in between the two sick teeth, as many as there are, until you reach the bleeding point on the other side. Then start binding again from where you began, and pull your hand gently and firmly so that it does not move. The wire should be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot slip out. Then take hold of the hook with some pliers and bring the two ends together, and tie them between the healthy teeth, so that it does not pierce the tongue; and let it remain thus as tightly as it can, and if it comes undone or the wire breaks, bind it with another wire. It will remain and serve this way for all time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of how to straighten two healthy teeth and two sick teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and experienced should attempt this, for sometimes they make the shape of a tooth from cow's bone, and put it in the place where there is a defect, and bind it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	cut the vein of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	There are two types of this vein: one that comes from under the tongue, either from birth or accidentally due to a wound; and the other type comes from the throat, which is how it should be. Open the mouth of the patient, lower their head, and lift the tongue. Then cut the nervous vein widely so that the tongue is dislocated from its socket. If there is a hardened area due to an old wound, cut it open and then cut the vein widely. Be careful not to cut too deeply into the artery beneath. When you are done, apply rose water or cold water to the area, and then place a linen tent under the tongue. Apply a poultice of garlic and vinegar to the patient's tongue every night so that the wound does not heal and stick together. If bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the site; if the bleeding stops, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery, which is good for this purpose. Then treat the wound further until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you see the vein is dark or black and hard, and the patient does not feel any pain, do not touch it because it is a ulcer. If it is declining to become a blister and there is moisture, cut it with a spatulum, freeing it from both sides. If bleeding occurs due to your action, apply ground vitriol until it stops; then return to your treatment, pulling everything out; then raise the area with garlic and salt, and treat the wound further until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes there appear in the throat warts which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and of dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either, so as not to cause bleeding; but leave it until it bursts, or it will burst by itself. And if it is white in appearance and the root is thin, have an instrument ready to cover it, but first check if the abscess has cooled down and is calmed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your lap, and he should open his mouth and the assistant should hold his hands between his own, and press the tongue underneath with the whole instrument, which is the shape; and it can be made of silver or thin bronze like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, grab it with the tweezers and pull it up into the almond, and draw any threads of the warts with it; then cover the instrument, which is shaped like a needle, so that it appears sharp; and yet the ends are curved, one towards the other, and they are very pointed, and it is made of iron or bronze:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then cover it with tongs, shaped like a needle:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	Let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other according to this same method; then after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and with water and garlic, and if there is bleeding, gargle with water, or with the peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it heals; and sometimes other abscesses other than the two tonsils appear in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway which was blocked, and could not eat or drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for one more day or two. And the abscesses had grown so much that they had pushed out two bumps from the openings of the nose. I quickly inserted a probe into one opening, then pulled it outward, extracting a large amount of pus; then I made an incision in the other nostril and cleared her airway and pressed her tongue; afterward, I inserted the probe into the abscesses and cut away at them, and only a little blood came out; thus, I unblocked her airway, and she began to drink water and then wine. I continued to cut away at the abscess for a long time, and it would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so, I packed it with a poultice and cauterized it from within the throat. Thus, it stopped growing; and I departed from these parts, and she recovered on her own afterward.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the iris descends to the pupil and it is swollen and enlarged, it is called "perpendicular"; if it is swollen underneath and round, it is called an "iris". When it is cured as we have said in the section on curing, and the cure does not help, and you see that the underlying inflammation has subsided and it has become thin; and if it is round and not long; and if it is blood-red or a pale color or black, then you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger in doing so. Therefore, when you see it, according to its appearance and size, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then insert the probe into the iris and move it around beneath the surface, using one of the two instruments I described for the incision of the two almonds. You must not cope more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit, for if you do, it causes pain and difficulty in speaking. After the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient fears coping, then you should use a cauterization on his tongue without fear. The method of cauterization is as follows: the patient places his head in your lap, then presses his tongue against the instrument we mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; then apply live coals so that they are not too hot nor too cold; and with this implement, which has the shape I have described, scrape off the surface of the eye.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And on the head there is a hair or place where medicine is applied, like the edge of a spoon, and the instrument is placed on all the medicine over the iris; and the patient should lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth due to the medicine inside, so that it does not go down the throat and into the lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it against the iris for about half an hour, until you see it become numb and the stinging of the medicine subside; then take some cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the eye so that the cotton is pressed against the iris; do this frequently until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after four or five days. If you need to renew the cautery with medicine, do so, and afterwards rinse the eye with cold water, and treat it with gargarisms until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them in one pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. The pot should be well-glazed with strong clay, and the instrument inside should be bent according to this shape:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it can be of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is pushed into the mouth of the patient so that the vapour rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed; afterwards, repeat this often, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things can happen; and do not do this after the hot abscess has subsided. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and place an egg-white inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the egg-white will not allow the vapour to harm the mouth, and this is a good and safe treatment.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there is a bone or fish spine, or some object stuck in the throat; therefore, you should try to remove whatever you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all your strength, so that you can move the object; and if it does not come out and is stuck in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the object will come out through vomiting. Or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry piece of bread; tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it; when it reaches the spot, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have described, take an instrument made of soft lead according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instrument should be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and the tip should be lifted upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or it may cause harm, and do not push the os down; and move the patient's head so that they can swallow the instrument, in order for them to dislodge the object; then, they can either swallow the instrument, or you can pull it out along with the object.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Sometimes the blood is stopped, as I have said in the discussion, by medical treatment; and if this does not help, then look in the throat of the patient at the sun, and then press his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the blood, then draw it out with a small hook or with thin tweezers suitable for this. And if this doesn't work, take a sheep's horn and put it in the throat of the patient, then heat the end of the horn, and do this frequently. And if the patient is suffering from acute fever all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood sees the water, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not stop as we have said, then smoke out the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described in the section on smoking out the throat. Do this many times, for it will certainly work. The method of smoking out is to place burning charcoal in a container with a perforated lid, and insert the end of the instrument through the hole; then you smoke out the patient, who puts the end of the horn into his mouth and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; and the blood will stop now, and if it does not, then smoke him out again many times. Let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty and dry foods, and drink no water; and then he will certainly pass it.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats hemorrhoids, when one can see it, resembles bent tongs in order to be able to enter the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has roughness like sandpaper, so that what it seizes, it cannot let go; and here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the abscess-draining instruments
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The appearances of abscesses are many, according to what the recollection hereafter comes to us in this book, and they differ in piercing and in size; and there are two ways in which this happens, one way being in its appearance itself, and the other in where it is located on the body. For an abscess on the head is different from one on the fundament, and a suppurating abscess of fleshy tissue is different from one that occurs at a joint, and each has its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And for an abscess one must not pierce it when the boil is soft according to its maturity; but there are some which one must pierce as soon as they have become crusty and are not cured according to their maturity, such as those that occur at a joint. For when an abscess occurs at a joint, and one lets it be until it is crusty all around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint will become corrupted, by which there is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal limb, and one delays the piercing until it has matured, it will harm the principal limb. Or if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it when it is crusty; and one must not pierce an abscess when it is crusty without digestion being complete, except for that which occurs near the fundament, so that pus does not push through to the inside and form a fistula; and it will take a long time to heal.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary for you to know the time of piercing the abscess which is dead according to its fullness, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the discharge and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary for you to make the piercing at the highest point of the abscess, and where there is movement; and let the piercing be long in the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and on nerves and arteries, and in all places equally where there is no fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	For abscesses that are in bending places, pierce according to the member. And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the piercing until it is confirmed in full digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, it will lengthen the body with poison from it, and it will be filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips and depths of it will harden. And for some abscesses, one should make small holes according to the width of the body, and in large abscesses, large holes, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where one should split the heart, and cover; when it has become as soft as a drape, and is dead, one should do as one does with blisters: and some are split in three angles, and some are covered like the leaf of a bay tree, as with abscesses of the veins; and some have a round incision, and others have incisions and similar covers.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those who do not have a head, such as a superficial abscess, should be pierced straight; and when the abscess is large, and it has drawn up a great boil, and you pierce it, one should not draw out all the boil in that hour, but some part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again from the top; do this many times until the boil has come out completely; likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman carrying a child, or a small child, or an old decrepit man. For the pus sometimes jumps with the mengeluarkan of the boil that it kills the patient, and you do not realize it. Therefore use great caution in this chapter, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, then dress it with tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then put a tent in each one so that they come up against one another; and if you have split the skin of the abscess and drawn it out all around, then fill it with old cotton or the shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and a cloth, and moisten it several times over the bleeding area. And if the bleeding persists, apply pressure and treatment, and the powders I have mentioned earlier in this book; and if it is winter, and the abscess is very nervous, then you should place moist tents and cloths soaked in warm wine and oil over it; and if it is summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should place moist cloths soaked in water and oil, or cool wine and oil, for a third of the day, as we have said; then drain the abscess, wash and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And now you must understand universally about the treatment of abscesses; I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses, and you will find this chapter [on the subject].
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Or know that there are small abscesses that come from the head, and they are like those of hives, as in the udder of a cow, and there are many types. There are fatty ones with a lot of moisture, and others that are hard and stone-like, without any doubt if the artery does not do otherwise. The work of this type is to try every instrument called an "entromissoire", from which the shape comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it is cut from above. And when the moisture is drained, it is scoured without leaving anything behind, as it will return if something is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and repeat this for those who stay overnight. Then restart with the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you are sure that there is no more pus left overnight; then treat the wound with suitable ointment, until it is healed. And if the abscess contains a fatty lump, cut it according to its shape, from above; and squeeze out the pus, and scour all over, and put all your care into drawing out the membrane where it lies; and if the artery causes contrary, then do as I have told you after. And do the same with the
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incision on the stone-like and moist abscess is lighter, because there is less blood. And if some of these abscesses are in the head or where there is no moisture, then they are cut open .i. abscess that I copied on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, white stone, and it could not be broken; and if someone had cut into it, it would have caused as much bleeding as a stone. In other abscesses coming to the head, those that come to the heads of children and to the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept at the most dependent place all day, so that the pus can drain; and they are treated as they should be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times abscesses come to the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are many, and are joined together. And each scrofula is properly within its sheath, as with the vein and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many appearances of these scrofulae. There are some which contain moisture, and some which are malignant and do not respond to treatment. So in one that you see has a good disposition to be touched, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side, and is not adherent to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or duct, and is not deep; then you should open it on top, and cut away each part, and the two lips of the wound are curved inwards, as necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; and draw out a little at a time, being careful not to cut into any nerve or vein, nor is the spatumile [a surgical instrument] needed, nor forceps, so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If you open a vein or an artery and it will not let you work, put crushed vitriol or some powder that stops bleeding into the wound and compress it; and leave it until the abscess is reduced and the wound softened and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your work, completing it; then examine with your finger if any small scrofulous nodes remain, cut them out and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the node, do not cut that node at its root but ligature it with a strong double thread and let it fall off without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton saturated in Egyptian ointment and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the whole node, it is necessary to bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, so that there remains no superfluity due to the size of the node; then ligature its root and draw it out, as we have said. For nodes that hold superfluous matter, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce thus for those previously mentioned, depending on it, then apply tenting with ointment and similar things so that what remains is corrupted by corruption; and when the wound is clean, cure it with ointment with healing charcoal.
de squinance	[of scrofula]
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients wrote and spoke of throat surgery; but I have never seen anyone in our land perform it, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinance, it is necessary to cut into the throat, which is called the "epiglottis"; and one should not hesitate to do this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected by the heat of the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the lung, one must cover the epiglottis to prevent asphyxiation due to strangulation.Si li maladie est en la gorge et qu’il soit necessaire de le fendre, il covient que li fendure soit a l’epiglote, ou li maladie ne pueda aver finne; car la est lor mort.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we should split it below three or four circles, a small split across the two circles, or according to the size of the split in the hyoid bone, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places where it is suitable to cut the epiglottis so that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long within it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the teacher is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to the entire length, then cut the cartilage until he reaches the hyoid bone; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the hyoid bone as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the windpipe of the hyoid bone which jumps out through the hole that is broken, and by the fault of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a little bit.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and cut all the way to the cartilage; then administer remedies that promote the growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuchasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of air has ceased.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he will breathe through the wound, and thus he is guarded from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passed in 3 or 4 days
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was healed
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maid take a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And I was called to cure him, and I found him as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I exposed the wound and found that blood had come out of it, and judged that it had not bled well or been treated properly before, as the blood was still flowing from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was cured;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the lady had no more trouble with her voice, and returned to her usual state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	so I say that when cutting the epiglottis, have no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess the color of yolk, and it occurs much in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and there are two types: natural and accidental; the natural type has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accidents happen in two ways, one of which resembles a tumor that comes from the brain, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from an artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear in it, and one should not operate with fire except on those who are small, and test and examine throughout the entire orifice;
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as solid as a tumor, and it cannot be pushed at all, then cut it, just as one cuts tumors, and slice through to the bone, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine thoroughly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And now I must explain the difference between a dislocation and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an issue is when there is a fever and heat, until the ebullition has passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the cold there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains a pustule, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, some are grey, some moist, and they have many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You should, when you come to the treatment of the cold, first test and examine it with all the instruments that are called "intramural", according to what its form will lead to in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of examining abscesses on the head is that you press the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core, then it will be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the instrument and pay attention to what is left behind.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If pus runs clear, whatever color it may be, treat it as I have described for other abscesses:
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if no pus comes out after the instrument is inserted, know that it is a cyst, so treat it in this way: make an incision in the shape of a cross and extract the fluid with tweezers, then lightly scorch each side of the wound and remove the coat where it lies to ensure it heals clean.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot extract it cleanly, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he stays nothing, he returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he stays a little, and the wound does not trouble him too much, then employ some corrosive powders on the wound, and bind it up, and apply soothing remedies to the abscess, and treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with that which causes pus to form.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the bleeding vessels are contrary or elsewhere, and you are in a hurry, use powdered vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the blood stops flowing; then return to treating what has been delayed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the cutting instruments, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small; and there are three types among them, called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for excising abscesses.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are like the needles used to pierce sorcerers, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are better than those made of black iron for excising abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	They come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the opening of the abscess.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the knives are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are some with two curves in three ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if they have three crooks, and are also in three ways; and if they have two crooks, and only one crook, and are in three ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these knives are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except on one side, which we use to scrape the bones without cutting the vein or nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And with these introducers, there are some that are wrapped in cloth so that the patient does not perceive them when opening abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one must not use it other than in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes a small instrument like slices of fists, according to this shape, with which one stanches blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that heals by cutting off the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes they are tied according to this great shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they become corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain unsightly and swollen, and if anyone wishes to treat them, then they must be bound according to the form of this line b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then close the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it heals;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags and becomes soft due to its size as it does in women, then they make two incisions above, through two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then he scorches the skin between the two lips, and removes the fat, and he applies what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it does not heal, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient will not rest, or due to blood flow, then you should fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it remain until it absorbs the remnants and fat, then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the testicles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come underneath the armpits are types of hard scrofula where there are nodules and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus within the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, they should be treated as we have described for fissures of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, they should apply a cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	from bleeding of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When an artery is cut, and the skin above it is sewn shut, it often results in abscesses. And so too does the vein swell and form an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one recognizes it thus when it is from the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	And when you feel it with your fingers, you feel a constriction. And when it is from the vein, there is a defiant swelling that appears.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore one should avoid cauterizing with iron, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, and in that which is inflammation of an artery underneath the skin of the neck;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then cut into the vein with a sharp knife, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle under it and pierce it all the way through to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in .2 inches, according to how I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then point to the location between the two bonds of an intercessory instrument so that the pus within flows out and the abscess is relieved;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that changes color, until the thread turns white;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to an opening in the vein, then you should dye your hand with something from the abscess all over the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then thread the needle under the spot you are holding in your hand, and pierce it through, and use a double thread so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have said, either on one of its two sides with a thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you are worried that the thread will come undone, then tie another needle to the same thread underneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then scrape the abscess so that the excess comes out, then scrape away the excess from the skin and leave what is tied;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place upon it .i. moist cloth in wine and oil, then administer treatments of tenting and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as an abscess comes in the artery and vein, so does an abscess come to the nerves when they are bruised or from too much exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in the shoulders and hips, and throughout all joints where there are connections, and it is .i. grievous abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it is in various states without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is held firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not completely in the body, but below the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and is mute from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, or below or above, and for those who are in joints, it is not appropriate to cover with iron: otherwise there might be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are on the head or forehead, make the skin the spatumi.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then he should stop the bleeding at once, and scrape off any scabs, then the bone, and sew up the wound, and dress it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to oats, and it has fine roots and large scabs; there are both small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	And I saw a man who had two of them on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, with fine roots, and they bled when cut.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I copied them and found one weighing 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cut is wide, and the cautery tools are in your presence, because there often come great flowings of blood when cutting, and if the blood flows away from you, then hasten to cauterize it.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision from the iron, then take a well-made piece of thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	And then release it, and do not cease to tighten the thread until he copes the joint, and seek out through it without work; and if the roots are large, if there is fear of coping from the belly as well, but you can certainly cope half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cover the thistle which is of foul color and poor sense, and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or cut, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowels, as it happens in other routings, or from blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is through the rupture of the skin and through the outlet of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it opens from various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers, it will pop back out, and sometimes it will be dry, and it will grow larger at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, then it is a minor issue, and it opens easily when you press it with your hand, and it does not constrict; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, then there is a swelling at the touch, and the procedure is to observe whether the appearance is from arterial blood, or venous blood, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If you must let it be. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is in the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to tighten his belt and be completely straight, then sign all around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to sit up quickly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the area that you have signed all around the spleen,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then cut off half of the abscess from the top all the way to the large nail;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind it tightly with a strong thread, or strong silk rope, and tie the bandage firmly around it;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then cut off half of the abscess that extends over the bandage, and push your finger in, and probe the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it stuck to the bandage, loosen it and push the intestine back into the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find a boil, they take it at the root, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery makes it go in the opposite direction, or the vein, then walk around well, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and then thread the two needles through what you have pierced in a cross shape;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then pull the abscess in four directions on the needles, and if you see any pus, remove the needles and let it drain until it can no longer;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you can cut it when it is thin and draining, then treat the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and draw out the blood or moisture you find, then treat the area as it should be, and close up the wound.
dou chancre	from cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have already discussed the types of cancer, how to treat them with medication, and how to avoid using iron in the treatment. Now, let's talk about cancer that appears on the skin, which requires great caution during treatment. According to the ancients, when cancer is found in places where it can be easily scraped off, such as on breasts, thighs, or similar areas, it should be completely removed during its early stages. However, once it becomes large and established, you shouldn't attempt to treat it, as I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed from it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should first purge the patient with black bile; then let them bleed if there is an evident repletion; then clean the area where the cancer is located; cut off all hair, skin, and bone from the affected area without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, and squeeze out any remaining blood with your hand or a tool; if the bleeding from the artery or vein opposes your incision, cauterize it until the blood vessels are sealed. Then treat the wound further until it heals.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already discussed the various types of dropsy, how the accumulation of fluid occurs, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatments using medicine and iron. Only two types should be treated with iron, tympany and hydrops, because these are deadly conditions. So, when treating dropsy with medicines, if the patient is weak or has other ailments besides dropsy, such as diarrhoea and similar issues, then one must not use iron as there is a risk of harm. But if the patient is strong and only suffers from dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then one should proceed with the following treatment:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Examine the patient closely and feel their abdomen with your hands. Then, using the spathum ilepinum, a tool with a sharp point, press on the abdomen to force the fluid towards the lower part of the bladder. The tool should be about 1/4 inch thick, but not so sharp that it pierces the intestine or causes bleeding.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then, determine if the dropsy is located towards the intestines. If so, you should make an incision about 1/4 inch deep and 2 inches long on the right side of the abdomen, just below the rib cage. If the dropsy is due to a liver ailment, make the incision on the left side. If it is due to a spleen issue, make the incision on the right side. Ensure that the patient does not lie directly on the incision so that the fluid does not flow into the weaker area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	perforate all the skin with the instrument and push it in, and lift your hand over the entire spatumile between the skin and the syphi as when peeling a nail or an onion; then pierce the syphi until the spatumile emerges at the desired location, which is where the pus is located; then pull out the instrument and insert this instrument from which the shape is derived: it resembles a thin silver rod, made of brass or light bronze, with a small hole in its lower part; on one side there are three holes, two on another, and one on each end; the head is shaped like a feather, resembling the shape of the incision that scribes make when cutting feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the tip of which is the alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the pus, it will immediately drain onto the instrument; empty half or a third of it, because if you drain more than necessary in one hour, the patient may die from the loss of his spirit, or he may faint, or come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty it according to the amount of its strength, and according to what the disposition of the strength of the patient indicates, and his pulses; then pull out the instrument and retain the pus, which is now retained by the plug at the hole in the syphi, as I have described, that you should pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small quantity of pus.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do this on any day, and avoid bathing as long as the wound remains open but use a little water. And if you doubt the wound, leave a lot of water, then use the cure of the grave or hot sand, and with much sweating in a bath and in the sun, and drink lots of fluids; and use the medicine to dry up the wound until it heals, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	on the swelling of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Sometimes children are born without an opening on the penis, or the opening is small and not in its proper place. In this case, one should immediately pierce it with a very fine spear, then insert a fine plug of lead into the opening, and tie it and leave it there for three to four days. When he wants to urinate, remove the plug and let him urinate, then replace the plug; but sometimes it is not necessary because the urine that comes out opens it up.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those with a small opening will be cured by the lead plug, as we have said, and it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are unfortunate because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the penis and the foreskin are cut to the size of a feather, so that the slit falls in the middle, as it should be; and take care to avoid bleeding which often occurs, and if it does, stop it with a cauterization of wax, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these warts come on the penis, and it is an ugly skin appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you should pick them with a needle, and cut and clean them all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with fine ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wart is malignant, black and foul-smelling, then you should apply cautery to it. When you have cut it, and if the wart is on the shaft of the penis, and part of it is inside and part outside, then you must first remove the wart that is inside; and when it is healed, cure the outside. Because if you cure them both together, the skin of the penis will not be secure and could be pierced, causing blackness and corruption in the penis and testicles; so cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and poppies, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery has two uses together, namely, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is damaged and withdrawn, then you should tie a lead weight to the penis and let the patient urinate; and when the skin is peeled back at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument until the foreskin is detached and the head of the penis is freed all around.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a serious matter to talk about this, then you should scrape it with a spatulum or some sharp instrument at the head of the penis and the foreskin; then bandage tightly between two, and place a thin damp linen cloth soaked in cold water over it so that it does not peel back again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a natural process like other wounds; nonetheless, when we perform this act intentionally, especially on infants, it is necessary for us to do the best and most gentle job for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not tell of the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and surgeons who did circumcision around one inch, and to many forces, and to all a new foreskin; then the wound healed because there were two membranes, and occasionally one above copes and remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they recover covering, and the pain is double, and in the cleansing which is of the glans is not assured the tip of the member; and in the cleansing of the nail occasionally the iron slips, and they ruin the work, and many times they are born so that they do not need cleansing, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing which is done to many forces, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in all directions; but the thread should be well-tied around the skin; and the method of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then you let him pull it out in any way he can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then hold the rod between your hands straight up and down, and keep the child's fingers or the instruments out of sight; then suck on the rod and blow into the urethra, and pull it out until the head of the rod is inside; then clean the rod thoroughly of any discharge, tie the site with a double thread, then tie it again lower down with another thread; hold the rod between your index finger and thumb, and pull it up quickly and smoothly, then release the urethra suddenly and pull the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood flow a little at a time, for it is the pus; and apply powder on top of the powder a thin layer of egg white cooked in rosewater, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, then treat it again until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the fingers at the cleansing should be like this: both knuckles should be tense and pointed, and the fingers as thick as the palm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the cut inside bleeds; therefore you must extend it with your fingernail so that the wound forms an abscess; and scrape it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tongs and then scrape it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts for 3 days, and what is under the foreskin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is relieved and the scab is light; then scrape as much as you can move, and beware of the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore treat the place of sudden wounds with powder, which we discussed in the treatise on powders, and if it scrapes beyond measure and goes upward, it will not harm; therefore treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	from the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to stone, or congealed blood, or bowels, or dead fetus, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees; and his feet placed on his back, and he should press his belly from above the back, and restrain himself as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is forced upwards to expel the stone, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come out as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe", of which this is the form: it should be made of thin silver, like the stalk of a bird; and the tube should be about a palm and a half long, and thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method of releasing the urine is as follows: take a double thread, and tie a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe; then squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe up to the end, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter, and have the patient sit on a chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil or olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then put the syringe into the penis gently until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the foreskin back towards the glans; then fill the syringe until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the pain come to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the person guiding where it goes is wrong; then tie the thread all around the penis tightly little by little, and the urine will follow the thread, then pull it out, and let the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	then start again with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blistering or bleeding occurs in the bladder, or pus is accumulated there, and you see water and medicine dripping out, then do all the apparatus that is called "clepsydra", and this is how to make it.
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The medicine for this should be such that it stops the flow well without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out and inserted when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, place the tip of the catheter in the moisture and draw it out with the catheter. Then push the catheter firmly back in, and the moisture will enter the bladder and the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: it is made like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher; and below there are two strings attached. Then take a sheep's bladder and put the medicine in it with which you want to enema the bladder. Then tie the medicine between the two strings that are formed from a thin double thread, and heat one pouch of the medicine over the fire. Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then pull your hand gently on the bladder so that all the medicine flows in smoothly, until the patient feels that the medicine has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a .i. circle, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong cord through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside whatever you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it into the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between a stone lodged in the ureter, and all the signs, and in which type of stone one must operate with cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens most often to children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and it appears yellow, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it blocks up; and most of these have the foundations; and the healing is easier for children until they are 4 years old, and it is much more serious in the elderly, and it is intermediate in those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is appropriate first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that is in the intestines. For sometimes it blocks the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and make him stand up and move around so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then have him sit between your hands, and his hands are under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the urethra, then hurry to cut on the stone. And if it does not drop out with just touching, then wet your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and insert it into his anus, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and draw it out to where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to lift his testicles up with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin underneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum, which has a curved shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And they cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and it should be straight on the stone, and both fingers should be on the anus, and the incision should be across the penis so that it is wide by force, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Sometimes the pressure of the fingers on the anus makes it jump without effort; and you will find that there is a kind of stone which has angles and edges: it is hard to extract; and there is another kind which is beneath, similar to a gland, round, and from which the discharge is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	For one with angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump out, you must pull it with tweezers which are also like a file at the tip, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert under the .i. instrument a very thin tube curved at the tip; and if you cannot capture it thus, then widen the opening a little, and if the skin tears, pull it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, insert the largest first into the neck of the bladder, then cut it off, then pull the rest out if there are several. And if it is very large, you must split it and make a larger incision. For two things happen to the patient: they die, or the urine comes out through the opening where the foreskin cannot heal; but nevertheless, try to pull it out, or break it up with tweezers, until you extract it in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound and bind it tightly, and place over it a damp cloth steeped in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then wrap the patient's neck again with a bandage and do not loosen it for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses and scorched wounds, and blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained due to this condition, which occurs when the urethra is blocked by urine: insert a needle into the wound and draw out the blood, for if any remains, it will corrupt the bladder and burst;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then wash the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist him in every way you know how, until he is healed; and it is necessary that every hour you treat him, you tie the two thighs together, and apply the medicine to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, and lodged there, and the urine cannot pass; then the cure of what I have said before, that you should cut it many times, is sufficient for this cutting. I have already tried this myself.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and let it be filed into three angles:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	then take a wire and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then push the awl into the penis lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the awl in your hand within the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then urine will come at once, and press your hand upon what is left of the stone which is inside the penis. As soon as it is broken, it will fly out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that deflates them, then tie a string under the stone and another above it; then cut the penis in between the two strings where the stone is, and pull it out, and untie the string, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does, the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will submit to examination, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	The third reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth reason is that a woman's stone is often deeper than a man's, so it requires a deeper incision, and great fear accompanies it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you find this necessary, you should bring in a skilled midwife and with her, a wise woman well-versed in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of medicine; and command them to do what you instruct concerning the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her finger into her vagina and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it beneath her finger, and I recommend that she pushes her finger into her vagina with the wound, and presses her left hand firmly on her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she must move the stone gradually from the entrance of the bladder all the way to the root of the thigh; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the vagina, where it is most sensitive; and feel for the stone in that area; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then insert the probe into the incision, if you feel the stone so as to widen the wound enough for the stone to come out; and know that there are many types of stones: small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with veins. You should know their appearances in order to identify them.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the urine is dark, put ground vitriol into it and hold it for an hour until the urine is clear; then return to your task, until the stone comes out, and have assistants whom I have mentioned to you in the extraction of stones from men to help you with your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if the blood flows and it is from an artery that is cut, then put powder on the spot and constrict with bandages and strings, and do not loosen this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out at all, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place has healed, return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rupture of the waters is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white phlegm, which is under the heart of the eggs, and is called "phlegm", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, so that one believes it to be another egg; and it is the skin of the egg between the white phlegm that we have mentioned; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this humor is from weakness that comes to the testicles, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it is a declining yellow, or red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have mentioned, it is a red abscess, i.e., a small one like an egg, and it does not open the testicle, for there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the testicle itself, then it is a red abscess with part of an egg, and so one believes that it is another kind of egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white testicle, then he feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test it on all the surfaces of the testicles, for which the shape is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then, what comes after the introduction, judge what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and a lot of cloth is placed underneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he lies on his left side and instructs the minister to lie on his right, extending the penis towards one of the two sides of the scrotum;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatule of lead, and cut the skin of the testicles from top to bottom until you reach the scrotum, and make the incision straight while cutting the skin of the testicles up to the white skin, and cut it off carefully according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the scrotum with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers in, and raise the scrotum up; and do not touch the skin of the testicles but only the scrotum; cut it all away carefully by pieces just as you did before, for if you do not cut it away properly, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the testicle has fallen out during your work, then put it back into its place when you have finished with the scrotum; then sew together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a single stitch, and then dress the wound as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then you should ligature the vessels that are suspended, fearing the escape of blood; then cut off the testicle at its suspension, and draw it out, and dress it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if pus is collected in two parts together, know that they are two abscesses; then lance the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash the blood away and put soft linen moistened in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another piece of soft linen moistened in wine and oil on top, and place two cushions on it, and tie it all around with bandages following this shape:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of cloth, and fill them with cotton according to this shape, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one of the pieces press on the bottom up to the back, and the other at the part of the armpit; and let the other two corners press on the two elbows, and let all the fastening be in the buckle of the breeches;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this abscess of fire cautery is in the place of an iron brand, and it is such that you press a thin dagger-shaped cautery, and lance the skin of the abscesses, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing the water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if one takes the cautery according to this form, and pierces that sinus deeply, and burns it with this delicate hot cautery
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And the scrotum in every way that you can, as far as you can reach; and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle; and know that this work is safer; and move watching for blood loss, and swelling from surgery.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you uncomfortable, or a hot abscess or blood loss or anything else, then treat what makes you uncomfortable according to what has been said earlier.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform incision, as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have discussed that the pus is drained.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Let the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at its base all the way to the bottom, and place the incision in the longest part of the body; and let the holes be wide, so that all the pus can flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the spot, and bind it up, and let the rest of the pus run out, then treat the wound until it is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white film does not let the pus out through the mouth of the wound, then you must push a feather or instrument used to treat dropsy patients, of which the shape is described earlier, into the wound; open the wound a little, and know that the pus will come back, and collect again after six months or so, and when it collects as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this chapter there are many dispositions of fear, because of which it seems better to me to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you about its work and the similarities to abscesses.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the groin; and it is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	That is to know about an excess of bitterness and ague, which are spread in the groin, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the abscess follows the color of the body; it does not hurt, and it is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes an abscess is grey, fearsome and stony, and has a fawning color; and at times it comes from a burst artery or a swollen vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a burst artery, it is known by the hot disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Those who are affected by swelling of the vein are known by their disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well make the incision on this appearance, and on the other marks;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and then you should cut the membrane of the yolk, and the white will rise to the top, and the yolk will come out easily from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the eggs are already hard-boiled with these colors, then you should simply cut the egg and remove the yolk.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is in the air in the face, or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all that membrane and scrape it smooth.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the growth is in the rear location, then you must scrape all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then treat the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a covering like a bud, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient groans painfully when he defecates;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is also very dangerous as mentioned above,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	The patient must sit on an elevated chair, then you tie the suspenders of the testicles firmly with your fingers
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	and pull the scrotum which is close to the penis, and grab the master testicle, and stretch it out firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut deeply and widely through the vessels with a sharp knife, until they are exposed,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel away from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then I insert a needle where it hurts. I tie a doubled thread to the first place where the pain is, and then I tie it to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then I cut through the skin carefully, following the length of the body, and I drain the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as in the others, except for any blood vessels that nourish one of the testicles;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because there is no harm in it, and if blood comes from all the vessels, then one should draw out the testicles along with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	if the vessels do not lose their moisture through the incision, and dry up so that they cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rot of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The cause of this hernia is through the incision that comes to the sinus, or the extension above the belly in the part of the intestines, causing the intestines to descend from that hernia to one of the groins;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this hernia is in the sinus, or from the extension of it, and these two types of hernias come from many causes: from a blow, or from lifting, or from coughing, or from a heavy load being lifted, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is sciatica, are that it happens little by little over a long period of time, and does not come on suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even all the way to the bottom, because sciatica presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs of sciatica are that it brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear in different places under the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestines and the body to release the sciatica.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the nerves go with the intestines, and are retained inside, and cause great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron, one must avoid fear.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the treatment is that you instruct the patient to grab his intestines with his hand inside the wound and pull them out if he can;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then press on his neck between your hands and lift his legs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then pull the skin taut from the bottom up, and cut all the way around the scrotum;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put hooks into the edges of the wound according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the pus can come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the scurf which is under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white scurf is uncovered all around;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your index finger into what follows the scrotum, between the white scurf which is under the skin of the testicle and between the second scurf;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and press what is behind the testicle, and between the second scurf; and then move your right hand into the scrotum, and hold the white scurf upwards in your left hand, and lift up the testicle to all of the scurf towards the groin;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to raise the arm, and loosen what is pressed behind the elbow;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and examine with your fingers if there is any hard, dry skin or wrapped intestine, and if you find anything, push it back into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	Then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back of the cyst, which is behind the scrotum skin; after the testicles, then grip the shoulder, which will appear from the threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	Then tie them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the cyst, which we said was under the scrotum skin, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the head with threads, and tie it tightly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the ligature according to the first long ligature of two parts, and after these two ligatures leave the syrup that is under the heart of the testicles for a moment;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then the other according to the roundness that the testicle carries; then cut into the part that is under the skin of the testicles, so that the blood flows, and the scrotum, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then administer soft woolen cloth soaked in oil, and place it over the wounds, and then administer the ligature that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this happens many times, and leaves the wound open until it drains through it; and if it is slow to drain, then it should be lanced with hot water, and what we have said should be applied until it drains.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then clean the wound with another cleaning, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to use fire to perform the cure.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is done like the remedy which joins the intestines, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting above gently from below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut open the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who is affected, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the veins, as we have said, and the place opens up; but no intestines should come out with the stool, and if any do, it is a small amount, and they should be repaired every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and yet if he remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer increases in size as the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the ulcer which is in the intestines, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes soft and swollen and open;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut the area of the rupture, according to its size, by about four fingers' width;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then extract the cyst which is under the skin, then take the thread and place it over the visible cyst;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press down into the bottom of the belly, then tie off the two places where the cyst is visible on the thread's head, and tie one and then the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the thread's head, and do not cover the cyst or stretch it with anything, as I have instructed you in the treatment of intestinal warts;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it like a wound. And when you tie off the threads, if it causes pain and cleans the wound, let it be cleaned until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilis is constrained, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cautery is mucous in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men due to the testicles within becoming softened, and it is milky white in appearance. When one wishes to treat this condition, they should make the patient lie on his back, and then cut the soft skin on top of the tunica vaginalis; next, bring the two edges of the wound together and stitch them shut with 3 or 4 stitches; then lance between the stitches and dress the wound as one would any other, until it is healed.
dou chastrement	of chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	You know that castration is forbidden in our law, and because of this, I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; it is only necessary for two reasons: the first is so that the owner knows how to respond when asked about it, and also knows how to treat it; the second reason is because we often have need of castrating certain animals to help us, such as bulls, rams, goats, and other beasts. So I say that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. When we do it by attraction, we sit the animal in hot water until the testicles are softened and dangling; then grab them with your hand until they are drawn up and you no longer feel them. For castration by cutting: you must tie the animal down, and squeeze the skin of the testicles in your left hand; then cut off the scrotum, and press on each testicle one time as you have cut it away; when you have cut them well, leave some of the thin membrane that is over the vessels; this type of castration is better than that done by attraction, because with attraction, sometimes something from the testicles remains, causing the animal to desire sex; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Here is the text translated into modern English:
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are of two types, like men: the first has both male and female characteristics, with hair and a penis that ejects urine. The second type is like women but has a scrotum and testicles on the penis.
de la tentigene	of the testicle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Testicle is a swelling on the natural part, so large that it is unpleasant to look at; some women have them as big as a hand, and it is curable. You should cut away the excess of the testicle with your hand or a knife, and then press it gently; don't cut too deeply though, or bleeding will occur, then cure another wound until it heals; there is also a growth that appears at the mouth of the scrotum, use that and if it pops out, it resembles a cow's udder, and so they called it "cow disease". You should then cut away the testicle as we have said, and cure it until it heals.
de erratique	of the erratic pulse
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic pulse is when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small; it can be innate or an accident from illness, or it could be due to an abnormal growth, a subtle hernia, or something else, and it occurs deeply in the scrotum, on the sides, or wherever. It affects conception and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers to come. The knowledge of this is through examination of the scrotum. If the hernia is apparent, you should press it with your fingers or a stick. If it's a subtle hernia, and it's close to the testicles, then do this: place your fingers at the base of the testicles, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then the testicles will be pushed up, so that the hernia is exposed and the opening closed. Take some wool, soak it in oil, and apply it to the area, and have the woman lie down for a day so that it doesn't stick. If the hernia is hard and thick, cut it away with a spatulum similar to bay laurel leaves. If the hernia is from a birth defect, then you should cut it out and apply a tent made of dry linen; then cure other wounds until it heals. And when an abnormal growth occurs in the scrotum, treat it this way, if it's not an inguinal hernia. Because for an inguinal hernia that is in the scrotum, one should not cut it.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows incessantly, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into a tumor; and we have already discussed their types, signs, and symptoms in the previous section. I will now discuss their treatment. I state that both hemorrhoids and tumors, when they appear in the anus and are painful to touch, cannot be cured using a hot iron. Instead, one should place the patient in a cool room, then cut the hemorrhoids with tweezers and pull out their roots, followed by applying a powder of blood-clotting medicines such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense. Next, one should bind her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water. If there is any bleeding, she should sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, galls, and similar ingredients. Also, prepare a plaster made of barley flour, honey, and garlic, and apply it to her back. If the bleeding stops, that's good. If not, use leeches on her back and breasts without using any iron instruments. Then take a piece of lamb's wool and soak it in plantain juice or dogwood bark infused in old wine, and apply it to the affected area. Once the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointment until it heals completely. The type called "albathir" is reddish and has a rough surface; it should be treated in the same way as the tumor, as mentioned earlier, and then the wound should be healed with ointment until it is completely cured.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Abscesses in the anus can arise in various ways, including chancres, piercings, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, among others, as discussed earlier. Now, I will describe the treatment for a hot abscess that occurs in the anus, which is different from those that heal on their own. If you observe that the abscess is painful, red, and swollen at the beginning of its onset, along with fever, then do not rush to pierce it immediately. Instead, let the pain subside first. Then, make the patient sit on a chair with two small seats where they can lean back and support their back. Their legs should be spread apart, with their arms bent and placed under their knees. Once in this position, suck the anus to open it and insert the instrument used for this purpose, being careful not to go too deep or cause any discomfort. If the instrument is too large, cover the opening of the anus with a cloth to avoid causing any pain. Then, insert the instrument into the anus and apply pressure. Once the abscess bursts, use your hand to feel for any remaining fluid and remove it. Next, place a moist tent over the wound, ensuring that it covers the entire opening and extends beyond the anus onto the perineum. Soak the tent in rosemary oil or rose oil. After two days of treating the wound with appropriate ointments, the patient can be given a cleanse using warm water mixed with honey, followed by water infused with lily roots and aristolochia, which should be applied to the affected area. Return to using the ointment after this cleanse. If there is any pus remaining in the wound, it is necessary to avoid using heat or iron for treatment. Instead, follow the methods described earlier in the text.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of childbirth and its signs: when you see the woman pushing downward and desiring to smell the earth, then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth follows nature, and the placenta emerges with the child; and when you see these signs, one should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly. For when it descends headfirst, the placenta comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excess fluids through proper purification; and those who come in any other way do not come naturally. For sometimes they come feet first, or outside the body from the chest, hands, or abdomen, or near the navel, and are sometimes turned upside down by chance due to other bad formations; therefore, the midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters, wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms and how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes headfirst through a natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her vitality is weak, then make her sit on a stool or have other women hold her up; and anoint her private parts with oil or fried fenugreek, and then the midwife should insert a little spatulum (as described below) into her:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and split the membrane, and squeeze her nail so that the moisture within flows out; and press the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, you should cleanse the woman's intestines with a poultice of fenugreek and olive oil; then make her sneeze and spit out some condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will now emerge. And if both hands come out, you should gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and support her so that she does not lean forward; and if the hands cannot enter and the child dies, squeeze the hands with the knife as mentioned before, and extract the child, and reset them in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out feet first, you should turn it upside down.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then grab one of the feet and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When he jumps up to his knees, instruct him to grasp and make him sneeze repeatedly;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if he jumps higher, if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, then gradually return it to its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take myrrh, and oil of sixes, and gum, and grind them all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the woman's nature within and dislodge this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is soaked beneath, have her put on a collar of myrrh, and leave it on for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on a chair, then have her sneeze and constrict her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the infant will now jump out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the infant will emerge onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands on it little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then he should be laid on his back and his feet hanging down, and lying on his side;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then he should be bent a little, and then the doctor should press his hands on his belly and lift up his hips, until he is straightened out;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not cry out, then he should grab his feet and move them up and down, then press on his belly upwards, then put your hands on him;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and we feed the child little by little; and instruct the woman to squeeze until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the exit of the child who comes out of a width of one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I must devise to bring back the hand
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be reset, then make the woman walk and lift her up;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then have her lie on a bed with her legs stretched out straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the mustard plaster that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and then try to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and hold the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to grip as hard as she can until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the baby emerging from his mother's neck, and spreading out his hands, and turning his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I want the midwife to take hold of his hand, then turn him little by little, gently rocking him;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is upright, she should apply a mixture of mustard and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair and instruct her to grip something; then make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way with all the membranes
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out in this way throughout the membranes, then scrape the membranes with your fingernail, as long as the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	And if the infant can breathe through its mouth and nose, and the membranes are blocking its airways, clear them so that they do not restrict breathing and the infant dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then place the infant inside, ensuring it is in the correct position, and instruct the woman to press down gently on her abdomen several times.
adonques si istra legierement.	then let it be lightly bound.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the discharge of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are often born, and sometimes .iii. or .iv.; and it is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and do not live long;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know those, that they are multiplied, and are unbound by the pus which divides them, which is attached to the skin.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes issue as naturally as a boil, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue painfully, then the cure, as we have said, and let the physician be skillful, and quickly and skillfully do what he does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it benefits health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb as one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like children according to the measure of the glorious sage,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is necessary that the doctor knows all this, because by chance a similar thing might happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	then act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating a woman for a stillbirth as I have described in the section on childbirth, and there is no progress and you must intervene with your hands:
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	you should know whether the woman is of sound mind and not suffering from any phobias that might induce fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	the woman should be laid on her back with her hips tilted downward and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife applies a poultice of two parts, to be bound on in bed so that it is treated for the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mother's mouth with moist oils infused with mallow and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then they are gently placed in the mother's mouth, then she is given something to bite on so that it does not hurt too much;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that if the child is turned around that it descends onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if they insert thorns into their eyes or nose or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the swelling is on the feet, they should be pricked and massaged on the soles of their feet;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the thorn in their right hand, and place the cord between their left fingers, and tie the cord gently all around their hand, and then insert the thorn into one of the places we have mentioned, until they reach the hollow part;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is how the thorn should be shaped:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then push against another knuckle, or a third one if you need to, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are pushed against each other in order to extract the tooth, and the knuckles are used for support on both sides, as is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part of it remains, then anoint some of his fingers with oil, and push them into that part, and pull on the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if nothing remains, then place this knuckle or a higher one in position, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned due to the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	you must wrap it in a cloth, as long as it goes;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then the cap on the joint of the palm or wrist, and so you must do in the other hand, and in both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is constricted at the exit, or it has a sharp pain accumulated,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it is necessary for you to stop the spasm, grip the spine between your fingers, press on the head and draw out the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you can use the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And in the same way, if it has a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with tweezers,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head of the shoulder pops out and is forced back in, it will be split open so that the moisture can escape.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot exit, then cut it out in pieces as best you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture can flow out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, and the pulse is light, and the pulse in the throat is weak.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strained in the belly or the thigh, then you must strain it with one garment wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and press the belly or the thigh until the moisture that is in it runs out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are dislocated and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	let him put his hand into the wound up to the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then I put in .I. hook or two, and pulled it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed, one should not work on it,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	one must apply moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the doctor prescribes poultices, and bathes in warm water to soften and relax.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can get it even, then administer what we have said about a live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no power, then let the child be carried in pieces, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if they are affected by what we have said about abscesses that come in childbirth;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if there is bleeding, let it be stopped with a bandage, and let the other treatments be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had died within her belly; then another was sewn on top of it, and the other one died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, she developed an abscess in her armpit, which swelled up and opened, causing a foul discharge.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat her, and I thought about it for a long time, but couldn't find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed strong attracting plasters on her, and some bones came out, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed because there are no bones in one's belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I probed the wound and removed some bones, so that the woman was much improved.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman lived a long time like this, and then she suddenly died.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter only because when the masters encounter something strange, they know to seek help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back into place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After that comes the form of the pulley, which is found in books; and with two turns at each of the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle, made of ivory or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and its mouth should be two digits wide, and the edge of the trees one digit, and in length a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the two limbs there should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly joined in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are built into the mouth of the saw to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, which is more subtle and lighter, should be made of boxwood or ebony, according to the appearance of pliers;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has two heads, two joints, as you see, the length of a palm, and two digits wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see to open the wound with all the instruments, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread wide;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two joints together in the wound, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on the instrument as you did with the tweezers, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the wound, as long as the midwife does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all surmounted, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the mirors have been prepared, the work is more swift, and men are higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair over the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze forcefully, and you must pinch her nose and mouth shut.Et quant ele vout esternuer, tu t’en vaas ad leus de la gosier et des entres; et si tu troves que ele retint la condisi ou l’alaine, tu la fai boire vin chaud, et si elle ne peuit boire, tu li mets del vin sur la narine.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she can't drink, put wine on her nose. And if she can't do that, it's still good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and make an opening in the lid, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as comfrey, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water over the fire; then put one end of the pot into the wound, and the other end over the mouth of the wound,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it steam so that the vapors enter the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the pus does not come out easily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it persists after this treatment and does not subside, instruct the patient to soak their left hand in oil of sweet fennel or in a poultice of old age, and then let it air dry.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek out the second head; and when they have found it, grasp and gradually extend it straight so that the bone does not slip out.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it should be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come out easily.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, we have described the treatment for sneezing and for fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all that we have said, then beware that you do not make a mistake in treatment;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is appropriate that he who is at the mouth of the wound, you should tie him to the thigh of the woman, then you should cleanse with tetrafarmacon ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if she vomits and returns, but still, when she vomits, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and causes pain to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Then one should use suitable fumigations: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke out the woman for the retention of flowers and afterbirth, if it is like this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is made of glass, resembling a pipe, and one puts the small end into the vagina, and the wide end above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and the smoke goes onto the charcoal, and it remains until it is used up, and one starts again with a new one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the uterus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born with an imperforate anus; instead, they have a narrow, slender opening.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If necessary, the midwife should pierce that slender opening with her finger, and not cut it with a sharp instrument, and she should be careful not to tear it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then she should put on wet linen, wine, and oil, and apply a poultice until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will close up again, put a piece of wood in the opening and leave it for a few days, then remove it when the child wants to go into the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then one must cover it suddenly: and it should be treated as we have said about the cane of splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from under the fundament are nodular and grow larger as they come from under the fundament, or in the space of two parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it opens up and secretes a thick white pus or thin yellow fluid,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these are Persian ulcers; and they are caused by either flatulence or belching when the patient belches, and sometimes a fart jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they have ulcers that pierce up to the bladder and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint and the base of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so one knows a Persian ulcer that pierces the anus and does not pierce through:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you put your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle made of iron or steel into the ulcer when it is not twisted.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is crookedness, insert a tent of slender splint or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or wind, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	you can be sure that it has not pierced through; then hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has pierced as far as the bladder or the passage of urine, and urine escapes, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent is inserted up to that point.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is twisting and pain in the area around it, then it has moved from its place, and medicine or bandaging will not help;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and there is no cure for these piercings other than labor and the folly of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is neither pierced nor old, there is hope of recovery by means of iron, as I have experienced,
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and have the patient lie between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a tent of bronze or of wood if there is a bend, as far as you know the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it in his anus, then you must insert your index finger,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and feel if the tent has pierced it; and if you feel between your finger and the anus, then you know it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if you don't work on it then one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	We nevertheless can heal some, but that happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid one does, then one scorches the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and he puts it all hot into the fistula, as far as it comes from the anus; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the charred flesh is burned, which resembles a feather of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then cauterize with tents moistened in butter until that wound heals, then treat with ointment that hardens and seals.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is like this without pus, that is good. If not, it cannot be healed any other way.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if the tent pierces and does not reach the bone that is in the foundation, and there is between your finger and the tent a thick covering of pus or of syrup, and you see the fistula below the covering of the heart;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the tip of the fistula is at the beginning, and fills up again before the tent, and then cauterize afterwards, until it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered, and it will fall; then beware of those charred cars that look like a bird's feather, and nothing remains of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the vein bleeds, and the blood flows between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with a medication.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery gathers together two things: namely, the scorching of the charred flesh, and the stanching of blood and the drying up of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of moist tents with butter or ground substances, until the flesh under the burns is healed and the burned cars fall off;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then heal the wound of the sudden, painful, hard, dry boils.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the depths of the fundament, and is separated from the body, put in two fingers or the fundaments, and investigate it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between two is the veil or the membrane, or it is close to piercing, there should be no sign of despair and hope, through the administration of one of three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bone, or if you can, put in tent and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	do not go too deep, lest you cut the tissue holding the foundation, and let the exudate come out as it will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it after it has been cut down to the foundation, or by tent or by another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cut out that piece of rotten wood which is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound and stop the fistula from spreading through the body towards the anus: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes they are like this: and when you have put the tent in the fistula, and it is close to the anus on the skin side,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert a twisted thread into both, and insert the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent at the edge of the anus, then pull out the thread from that opening as you would insert your finger into the anus.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And pull on the head of the thread and bring the two shoulders together, squeezing them tightly, and leave it for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes, as long as the threads draw close to each other and stick;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is closed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, then have it burst in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one must not bandage a wound that is so deep, but rather heal it, as we have said, until it is clean.Et s’ele est em parfont, si covient le lacement coper, et puis le cure, s’ele est em parfont, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spine of the thorn that they use to pierce the fistula is very sharp and pointed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one does not grasp what one should not grasp, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they ooze blood from time to time.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	And there is one or more of them, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus; but those that are outside have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then a little more yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them in the anus, it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to defecate into chambers, until the hemorrhoids come out, and they become visible;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if it is large, you may cut it with tweezers or your fingernail, then pull it out by the root;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot be held with tweezers due to their moisture, then they can be held with a cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	take them out with your fingers, then crush and powder some hot powders that are in place of cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the bowels cannot move, then cleanse the patient with a harsh and sharp enema to clean what is in the bowels so that it can move freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients hold their breath, and if the thread is forced out from the bowel, then the treatment is minor;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should take them with your nail or tweezers and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If you need to administer stitches in this way: take a twisted thread, and thread it onto a needle, then pull the thread above the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread underneath the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tighten the thread firmly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to stop the flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate over the wound, and command the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it drop, and when they have fallen, then treat them with ointment and other remedies until they heal.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	drying from the heat or moisture of the bowels
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Drying of the bowels often occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You should cut off the tip of a spatulum or your fingernail and apply it to the sore without letting it touch moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it is healed as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then restart the cautery more fiercely than before, until it heals a lot, and let it be scalded;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where it trembles
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Ant is a small creature with a stinger under its body, and it goes deep underground.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Sometimes the sting of the ant causes frostbite, and it feels like death, shivering throughout the body, more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a feather from an owl's wing, or a strong vulture's feather, and place this feather on the shivering, until the purple circle around the shivering disappears.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then return your hand to all of the feather, moving it around the shivering, and insert the feather deeply, and pull out the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a needle of bronze or iron according to this form, and let it be slender beneath and broad above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you wish, cauterize the wound, as it is before the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes an enema is made of silver or brass, or molten copper or lead; and sometimes it is made with these small and large instruments, according to which they are made for someone.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are administered treatment for children and those who are feeble and in pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large enema is above wide, where the bellies are tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an untying where the belly is tied, as you see, and the gut is pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other.;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small openings,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and has between each aperture .I. finger's width of space, then weave into these apertures .I. strong thread of twisted thread in .X. or around, and tie the belly so that it is like a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, it lies against the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the minister squeezes it with both hands together until it is all voided, then pull out the clyster and let the patient lie on his side,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to go out, let it, as much as it can; and if he sleeps a night afterwards, it is even better help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him for an illness of diarrhea, and the medicine wants to come out quickly, do it again until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then the enema should be as gentle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is how to make the gentle enema that will not hurt the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you about the cures with hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and depending on the location and the cause of the wound.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The objects that cause wounds are from stone, and cutting with a sword and knife, or a spear, staff, or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the locations on the body, such as wounds that occur on the neck, or head, or leg, or stomach, or liver, and similar organs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you should quickly doubt a hot abscess: if it makes the head bleeding immediately from the wound, and the bleeding is in the opposite direction of the damaged part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and prevent the patient from becoming bloated with wine and fatty foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to fast, then his food should be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place a warm compress on the wound, if there are hot abscesses, soak cotton in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, place it on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding, and has not been moved by the wind, powder, which I will describe in a little while;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has moved, put some ointments on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword-cut and similar, and the lips cannot be approximated with tenting, then approximate them with suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, from the ribs up.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and gaping, and not holding together except by a thread, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin,
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as eggs and cooked wheat, as well as meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find skin eruptions, and it is not on the bone, then scrape off all of it, and let it flow out, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, causing blood to flow without stopping, and it cannot be staunched by remedies, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should apply this powder that heals as soon as the burn occurs.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is thus: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and mix the powder subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	And apply the wound, and press it firmly, until it is well healed and joined to all his blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then dress it well, and leave it without dislodging, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one makes this from quicklime only, when one does not have the incense or dragon's blood, but the fire should open the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved the powder, just as it is, put on some of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments or barley flour paste made with water and honey until it turns yellow.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if there is a fracture with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with small pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and the one on the head, except that the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerve, there should be no other treatment than leaving it alone and not putting anything that restricts it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be warm, like hot water washed in cool water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked water also washed in cool water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other moist stones according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut it and ligature it, and then treat it until it is healed.Et si li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is chapped and full of pus, then pierce it or a lower place.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then ligature it, and let it be bound, and cauterized if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage is blocked, by which food goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if it cuts through the cartilage above the Adam's apple, but does not touch the throat itself, then reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then stretch it gently, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has left an impression on the bone, then treat it thus;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, then tie them tightly together as much as you can, and those that you cannot reach, leave them be until the wound has healed over them,
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it heal and close up the opening;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder which I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a deep spear or knife wound, and the patient breathes with difficulty: then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that oozes out of it deeply.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and heal the wound;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it .ii. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm or tremor comes, nor bad twitching of the limbs,
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see these good signs, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cure it with poultices and other remedies until it is completely healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal and function, then you know there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or on the chest or back, then treat it as one who is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has cut into the bone, and there are pieces sticking out, then clean the wound and pull out the foreign objects;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislodged, then let the wound fester, so that the foreign objects will come out;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound, sometimes the intestine, or the bowels, by which the entrails are exposed;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and sewing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because it is harder to sew up the intestines if they are not sewn up gradually, from warm to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	and because the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, they contract more with cautery,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and therefore it is better to cauterize the intestine at its own place than at other places. [II.13]
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that dislocation of the belly occurs in four ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common dislocations occur in the belly's suture;
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the other dislocation of the body's wounds and two other unique dislocations are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And yet they are most commonly associated with the belly's suture, and I will describe each one and clarify:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when a wound is small, and there is no intestine protruding,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and it can be easily repaired, which is through one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because of the small size of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is inflamed due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with lukewarm water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you can boil in water squills and cyprus and spice,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and rose the intestines until their inflammation is relieved;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes it makes this restraining wine, and it is changed to a soul for deflation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, then moisten the intestines with water or old wine in which herbs have been cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	because through this, the entrance is blocked by a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, they make a small hole in the instrument with which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is mud from the river,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that one should not cut without great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inside the curve and not out, and see here the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	one puts it back in its natural shape and place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, for this is worth it.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if you must make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	put the head and feet higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and so is the rupture of the belly in one of its two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	put your understanding into this: that the ruptured part be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus one should manage both great and minor wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For minor wounds, use what you are skilled in,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have with you .i minister pity who dyes all the hair on his hand
et assemble les levres;	and pulls together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common way of suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you should pierce an needle or more, according to the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leaves a gap of about an inch at the head of the wound, and inserts a needle with a strong thread through it;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierces the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is under the skin inside, as far as you can make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and binds the two heads of the needle together with the fourth thread;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then draw it out with a double thread around the needle of 1/4 part
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then join the 2 edges of the wound smoothly,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave 1 digit of space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease doing this according to what you need of the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because thin needles pierce all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	they should therefore be moderate.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cover the heads of the needles with a layer so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and they use tents or cloth over the needles to hold them steady,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let it be until the wound is closed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it requires only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and is that you join the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the wound together with a needle and a strong, thin thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	And when you have pierced these heads all four together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then put the needle back into the wound in the same way that one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and space between each stitch the thickness of a thumb nail;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching is for men,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that a man had on his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was made by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	was more than a palm wide,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and protruded intestines a good two palms long,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine to where it had been 24 hours before,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up for fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And those who saw him believed that he would die, and this was a miracle:
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointments, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and applied cotton wool to the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Here I will tell you about two proper methods of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and thread it from outside to inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	once the needle has pierced the skin from right to right, then tie off the thread where you threaded the needle;
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and have it pierce through from the inside out;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier sews furs,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and that you leave once the edge on one side, and pull it back on the other, until the seam is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing, which Galen describes correctly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is such that they unite the two parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the chief to the other chief, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	stick a needle into the nearest vein, and make it pierce only that spot,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two chiefs of the syringe;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside part just to the inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	that there are two kinds of dislocation;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both sides of the part affected up to the chest, in two other places that are on either side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the best and most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says this, and some testify,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	sew up the abdomen with .ij. needles, one in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you must thread one needle from one side and the other from the other, as those who sew up ulcers do;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when there is a rupture in the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	the stitches will be more painful than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The diagnosis of the wound is the same as for other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	It is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, and the fire has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then put back the intestine and the gut; then put on the cooling powder,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the fire has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and sew up the wound, and the navel;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, apply old cotton, as soon as it begins to ooze pus,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and change it twice daily until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine for various conditions when wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then you should wet a light linen in warm tempered oil, or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if they feel pain or itching in the testicles, which often occurs,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they are enemaed with warm wine, especially when the itching extends to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces inside; and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called "young" cannot heal when it is raw,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is due to the abundance of veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the fat jumps out of the wound, then put it back inside just like the intestines, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has become green or black, then you must tie off the area that is black so that bleeding does not occur;
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligature,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part below the wound to ease the extraction when the sutures are removed and the wound is closed.
de la routure dou boueil	of the thread
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore it in any way,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw a man was stabbed in the stomach with a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became a fistula and discharged fluids, and he experienced both diarrhea and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to my abilities, and I did not cease sutilizing until he was healed and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that he was healing, I doubted that the patient had an evil in his belly:
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no evil in him, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimentarors said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take thread from old testicles, then gather the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it over the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it pulls the mouth closed again;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then tie the head, and it will hold so that it cannot come undone,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then apply another fomentation in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
et cout la plaie.	and then examine the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If they pierce the intestines and do not harm the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestines with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this intestinal thread that is very charred,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the end of this thread a thin, twisted flax thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the needle and sew up the intestine, and then pull it back in;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing up the fissure is not useless, according to the path of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal veins, then there is no healing except through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula, wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that any wound or abscess, when it wakes up, is generally called a "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and likewise when it is swollen and returns bow-shaped.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the verdant nodulation, a hard and white swelling, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also swollen like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it is clear and bowed, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not cleaned and has no pus,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	this is only due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is, by the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or for its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard charcoal within, and on the lips, that does not allow blisters to form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much phlegm;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or because the wound is putrid, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is tardy in digestion, and slow in health, and swollen by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments for this disorder in the section on diseases of the head.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula that is performed manually.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	You should know that a fistula can occur anywhere in the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or the sinus, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the sides,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or the spine in the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it affects the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are in this way are of grief sanation, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come up to where I have said, and you have faith in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you see it, take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, so take it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is crooked, then look for a thin, flexible tent made of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because lead bends and moves around the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot explore it well with tenting,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture travels from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then seek bleeding at your discretion, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and is cut through deeply,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand down, and where he feels it most.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and once you know the exact location of the dislocation, whether it is near a joint, nerve, artery or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places I've just described, then treat it according to what I've instructed.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove any putrid flesh and rotten matter within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healed.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	And if the fistula is deep and in a good place, you must dig it out as deeply as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then put moist tents in the medicine until it reaches the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply warm compresses until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve troubles you in the principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness, then treat it until the decay is completely removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then clean it with warm water as long as it is necessary;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healed and becomes swollen again as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	you should know that you have not gone to the spring:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you uncover and desire as much as you are deep
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	then remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other cause than weariness of nature
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction has an appropriate instrument for this purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, pull them all out, not leaving one behind,
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture causes it harm, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	then cut and burn the moistness, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something caustic over the wound,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it sit until the pus has run around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have easier access to the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as those in the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	then only remove the corruption until all of the darkness has been eliminated,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large amount of decayed matter in it, and it comes up to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	one must scrape and cover all of it up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take example and assistance from it in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	so that the matter came to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no reason to pierce it to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctor through his folly operated so much that the abscess opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and much matter came out of it, and it became a fistula, and there were many wounds that all bled and discharged moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many put off treatment for around two years, and no one had any skill in the art of medicine,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called there, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which flowed from the holes in great quantity;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red the body of the young man, and had a yellow colour.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent at one of these holes, and then searched all the holes,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some came across from others in all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurried and dug into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it rotten and pierced, with corruption coming up to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw what appeared to be rotten bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	And I began to heal the wound with hot medicine for a long time, but it would not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	And then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found that the corruption was continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then tried to heal the wound;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and the pain left completely.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	Then I treated it with medicine; and he was healed and sewn up quickly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and the operation did not need to be repeated except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of my fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	Because through the evacuation of blood he often bled, but he was completely healed.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and there grew a hard lump in the place of the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or discomfort anywhere, neither when walking nor standing.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in the following manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take a ligature and tie it tightly around the head of the bone that protrudes,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct someone to hold it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another larger piece of linen on top of the first bandage, and tie it over the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and hold the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh towards the bottom,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the place where you want to cut, so that the blade doesn't cut into the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a hot brand or a flat object under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must work as long as possible until one can see and smell the corruption, then stop.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is rotten and will not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	cut away all the flesh; then place a hot brand under it,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then bring the two parts of the broken bone together, and let the healing take place from the end of the break, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the joint, and let the bone where it is corrupted heal from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no need to cut, except for the corruption itself;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is at the base of the hand or the foot, and it is very serious,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but you should still examine this erosion, how it appeared to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the knives and probes for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the joints,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, one must prepare an instrument for each type of procedure.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	And you should know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need according to your knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of the illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you consider the instrument which you need according to what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders may dislocate due to internal causes or external forces.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have applied that corrosion through the cure of medicines, and it does not help,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you must treat the shoulder joint; it is necessary to cover that member up to the point where the corrosion occurs,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes through the sky from death, or through malice, which is greater, because of the fault in the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so it seems to be burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the darkness comes the corrosion of the limb from one member to another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and affects throughout the body; so you rush to the head,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is through the sting of some venomous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and adder and similar,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the bite is on the head or neck, then cut it, and do not give it any space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it reaches the hand, cut at the joint so that the sting does not go into the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it reaches the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is fatal,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it is not appropriate to reduce them below a certain amount due to its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and thus one proceeds when the erosion occurs in the foot: if it occurs in the first joint, then one treats the next joint afterwards;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it occurs in the foot, then one treats the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up the leg, then one treats at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to kill the patient.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover the limb with a cloth or bandage is that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister's hand down from the lower ligature, and another minister's hand up from the upper ligature,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you loosen the skin between the two ligatures to one and a half spans wide, so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the cautery or silk, and place a linen drape on each side so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the wound gently,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you can apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the wounded member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a man in a dream:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a darkness that looked like a burn from fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion started first on his toe of the foot, so much that it discolored all the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he stopped covering his feet, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after that, the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I applied striking remedies after purification of the body, but he could not stop the corrosions;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cover his hand, but I did not want to because I had no hope of striking the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was feeble; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and cut off his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have never heard of anyone doing otherwise if they had need of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess occurs in a fleshy place, and remains so long that it causes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and drains, and the place remains hollow, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin above is as thin as a delicate cloth,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and it does not heal up to the bone or nerve, and such a condition is called "sore",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called a "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone in an open wound, then it is called a "fistula".;
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is to cover the entire sore, especially when it is thin, just like a cloth.;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And do not fear for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have confidence that the skin is burning, and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thus with a clyster:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	observe whether the breasts are large and the pus in them has an evil-smelling odour,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then cleanse with an Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take ashes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in .i. vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take some of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and enema the breast, and constrict the orifice;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this as many times as necessary, until the breasts are deflated and the pain is relieved;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes they are enema with ashes water,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you burn vine wood ashes, and pour water over it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then let it flow, and enema until you know that the breast is well healed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ashes water,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	then enema with water and honey in which there is a little litharge powder;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you can enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and wine makes blood flow;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and are confident that the wound is clean,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if it cleanses by causing a bowel movement,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you press out the pus with a syringe, and they treat it with a poultice made of rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the opening of the breast is small and the catheter cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	enlarge it with a needle, and insert a tent made of the Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged enough;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, then cut it to just the size where the catheter can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the hole that drips downward is on top, then cut above or below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is perforated, it doesn't allow food to pass through;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the wound below as you wish,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so that the bowels move to the lowest place they can reach.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	and when the bowels are empty, they should not be constipated.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot massage the breast from below as you wish,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then move the bowels gently downward, and leave nothing in them.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take strengthening medications to put over the chest,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and they are on a linen cloth that covers the entire chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then press firmly on the nipple of the breast a bit harder than before,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then apply ointment to another cloth according to the amount of discharge from the nipple,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and placed it over the aperture of the breast to relieve the bowels, and did not loosen the large bandage until after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and that which is above the aperture of the breast, often remove to relieve the bowels,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what flows from the bowels, whether it is poison, pus or sufficient, digested or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that jumps over the opening of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	you know that the milk is coming out, and approach the saints;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then loosen it in the morning, or at noon, and when you loosen the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	change to another garment, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if milk flows from the breasts for many days, know that the breast is not averted.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle venom flows after a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because health is approaching. For there are people who have slow healing in their wounds, and those that heal quickly;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if milk flows from the breasts for many days, know that the breast is not averted;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breast is slow to heal, and is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in effect.
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	just as an ointment that has a diaphanous quality, for it contains much vitriol, and this is the most effective medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take the diaphanous ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it. Also, make honey candy thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when a final judgment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them up and mix the powder with honey over fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then smear it on a cloth, and apply it to the chest, and sometimes administer a long aristeologus,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celandine, which is like flour of beans and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and use simple or composite drugs: grind them, make them into powder, and apply them to the honey I mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is deep, and makes impressions in the bone, or in hard tissues, or in soft tissues;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand, caused by a wound or injury. It can also occur on the toe, although this is less common. The condition is characterized by inflammation and the formation of pus beneath the nail, which can cause discomfort and even pain. In some cases, the nail may separate from the nail bed, allowing for the accumulation of pus underneath. Treatment typically involves draining the abscess to relieve pressure and promote healing. It's important to address panarice promptly to prevent further complications.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or from an injury to the foot, or perhaps it arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it becomes infected, and no attention is paid to it, then a large abscess develops,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and run and flow low until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they will reach all the way.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corrosion reaches to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is twice as large, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	you must cut away all the surplus growth from the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cautery is a great help if the bone and nail are healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses on the flesh and starts to grow out, and the bleedings
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	you should put the thread under the nail so that it doesn't press against the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the bottom up, and strike that subtle and gently,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining skin burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then strike it and draw it out, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the tooth decay, cut it with a chisel as mentioned earlier,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then fill it until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is decayed, and hollow, and it hurts a lot, then you must heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail with a chisel, cutting diagonally across the top,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and ensure that the incision does not go all the way to the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	if it happens, put something on top of it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the shoulder
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The joints of some people's hands by chance are all fleshy,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone where there should be flesh, and occasionally there is bone where there should be nail.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or from the knuckles on the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that grow from the knuckle of the finger do not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that grow from the joint of the finger sometimes move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cauterization of one who is fleshy is light, in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cauterize it at the root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who was born in the root of the joint is painful to cure: you must hold the cupping.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who is born in the rectum, it is necessary for you to first cup the fleshy part roundly up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone with a suitable silk, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together come by birth, or by wound, or by burn, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	You should cut the suture, so that the joints can heal according to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or moistened clothes in rose oil, so that they do not bond together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place it between two thin pieces of wood, so that they are sewn together as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to one of his hands with the palm, then sew up that wound as it should be.
Des vils	Of the poor
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Wounds are large, wrapped, and full of melancholic superfluities, which come to many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more occurs in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him some purgative medicine, and then the basil oil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is where you make incisions and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The surgery is performed as follows: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the veins are dilated.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then hold the leg from above the thigh down to just below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then open a vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide cut,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then squeeze and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood has come out as the patient can tolerate;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the scurvy, and he is ordered to eat meat seasoned with black holly;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the bloodletting and bleeding when the veins are full, which helps the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The raising of the limb is as follows: lift the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then place it in hot water, and raise the leg until it turns red, and open the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have any bandages, heat them in the fire and then apply them to the vein from above on the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the joint, and scorch the vein on both sides until it bleeds when you press it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it appears red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then press down on the vein from below, until it is raised out of the skin, and then it can be pressed at the joint easily;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then cut in another place above by three fingers; then scorch the skin over the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then ligature the vein, as you have done before, and bind it with another hook, as you did before;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut another vein, or several if needed, then ligature it, and cut the vein in the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then draw and ligature it until the second cut; then extract it from cut to cut, until it is all out, then cut it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot milk and raise it, then insert an needle tied to a strong double thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and tie it and pull it, and put it under a rod, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not slip, for if it slips, then one cannot milk or raise it, and it brings harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have milked it completely, then place on the wound wool moistened with wine and rose oil; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	you should split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one covers the vein should be curved, but not cutting, so that it does not cut into the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of a large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut into the vein; but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
De la voinne civile	Of civil bleeding
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This bleeding is restricted to the legs, in warm climates where no herbs or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	It may also occur elsewhere on the body, and this happens with pustules that form beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	such as snakes and worms that grow inside the body between the skin and the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then change the site, and start the vein coming out, just as a plant's root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the shoulder opens, you must wrap around it a piece of linen from one and a half to two and a half fingers wide, and tie it off,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the linen hang down to the leg, and every time it falls away from the body, wind the linen around the body again, and tie it off;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap the rest around it, but do not cover the root while it is growing out;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cover it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pustules where it is, and a serious illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it should be treated little by little until the end, and nothing of it remain in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and sometimes this vein, when it is opened, is as long as five or ten palms,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one man came to me, from whom it grew ten palms in length, and when you cut it off, it bled one drop or opening, and it was perceived all the way to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that all of it came out; and the matter within was evacuated, and in the place were applied healing remedies for several days, then it was cured as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes there are many wounds, and especially when they open at the joints of the feet or on the feet,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and from which much pus flows; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land, because it often happens to oxen:
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	And it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, going up and down all over the body,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it feels like burning as it moves from member to member until it breaks through the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the putrefaction of some humours, such as come up in worms and serpents and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and that happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being treated and bled, one cannot help but wonder what it feels like when it bites:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	then you must tie the area above and below with a strong, tightly bound ligature.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and draw it out forcefully, and if the blood is flowing inside the flesh, and you cannot stop it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then cauterize it with fire until it stops bleeding.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the most harmful things that it does is that it makes the eye water, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, then press underneath it firmly, then grab it and pull it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and one should use a purifying treatment for the body with soluble medicines to eliminate bad humors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of fermenting meats that cause putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	About the pain that comes from flatulence:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vachair" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then travels from one limb to another; I saw this with my own eyes.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she bared her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it move up as if it were a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	as quickly as anything, like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain leaves that area and moves into the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this disease progress in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I had seen many who had experienced pain moving from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had not seen it as I did in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because women have soft bodies and uncovered breasts,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason appears that compulsion of wind.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And it is not apparent according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels the pain, if it appears to you as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the vein above and below is dry, and then apply pressure until that compulsion of wind leaves its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure is for those who fart wind, as with stinking pills, and serapium pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is such that there are those with large points, small ones, and also flat-headed and hooked.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those that dislocate in a limb do so in two ways: either in a principal limb they dislocate,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore on any part of these members, and you see the signs of death that I shall tell you hereafter,
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must be careful to extract this arrow, for death follows in many cases.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And if you do not see these bad signs and the arrow is not deep inside, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	The sign of the brain is when the arrow pierces the bone and goes through to the brain, and the cerebrospinal fluid leaks out on top of the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there is scorching and swelling and blisters and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and loss of senses, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps he loses his senses, or his hearing; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and there is white moisture from the wound, resembling pus, and also blood clots; and
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if these signs appear, then take care of it, and pull out the arrow if it is not stuck inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the seventh when it falls or turns, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as though it were stuck in a hard object, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the seventh turns just like the pulse, and short black blood comes out, and there is chilliness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then know without a doubt that death is coming.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the wound that never leave the chest are foam-filled bile coming from the wound, and a swollen throat, and the patient's colour changing, and high panting, and chilliness leaving.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the sole of the foot, it affects the small bones; and causes great swelling and great pain and sighing; and all the limbs of the shoulder are moved.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, by chance something indigestible might jump out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the belly, and nothing comes out through the rectum but feces, then there is little hope for a cure or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine comes out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that this wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man that an arrow struck him in the cheek or the jaw, at the root of the teeth:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and pulled it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And draw an arrow through the eye of a needle which has fallen into the fat of the eye below the membrane below.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was re-inserted and could not reach it except for its tip towards the forest,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was as big as an arrow from a Turkish bow, about .i. foot long with a light wooden shaft; the jaw was healed and no bad accident happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And draw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab in origin with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beards, and I applied subtle remedies until they were cured and the Christians recovered.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrow from a man that was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	And then, after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrowhead, dislodged it, and extracted it, and he experienced no adverse effects.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his back, and the wound is sewn up above it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains inside him, and he does not change his natural habits,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and does not experience any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you wish to treat another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and remain thus without great pain; and many others similarly.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And an arrow struck a man of the royal family, the king's nephew, in the eye
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly tilted to the right; and the arrow was fully inserted
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to attend after she had been struck for 3 days. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried her with every subtle test, but I didn't feel anything.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the wound an astringent and digestive poultice, so that the swelling would go down;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and revealed the location of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the ointment again and opened the wound directly, and the patient remained in this state for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow inside his shoulder; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied medicine with a corrosive agent to the wound directly, until it was opened,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I examined it, and felt the tip of the arrow which protruded from the wound;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied this medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow became visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it healed well in about four months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I lanced the wound that I had pinched with tweezers, and it bled from both sides but could not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I ceased not to devise and contrive instruments until I made them .i. pair of tongs well made
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what their shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I treated and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And those who have experience judge that cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewed up and the patient completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	I will now tell you about the extraction of some arrows.
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you may apply my advice to those cases which I do not describe, for books cannot encompass everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise doctors understand a little about many things, and about what they know and what they lack,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	they discover new remedies and instruments, and the downward path of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows enter the members where they are stuck according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by the place they enter or by another route;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which goes out by the same place it entered is an arrow entering through fleshy parts, and sometimes it goes out immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not go out immediately, leave it as long as the flesh around it becomes rotten, and relieve the exit;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it like that for a few days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will pop out, and if it does not, then pierce around the entire nail with a thin needle until the area around the nail is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes all the way to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have mentioned are harmful to the patient: then do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow pierces to the jugular vein it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the jugular vein,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains for several days without any bad signs, then use the trepan.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged very deeply and cannot be removed, then administer bleeding around the wound, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged within the body where it cannot be seen, then it will go to all parts of the body.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you can feel it, then draw it out with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then open the wound as wide as necessary;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs in the arrowhead so that it holds fast.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you can, cut away the flesh that is pierced through by the bone in two places.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or fold back the barbs of the arrow so that you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow as you pull it out more forcefully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at once, then leave it until around the nail it becomes soft, then pull it out, for its extraction is easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you feel contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and put on a poultice as you are able to gently pull out the arrow without danger,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	either quickly or slowly, either firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was in when the arrow hit him,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest help if you can, and if not, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	Arrows that come from another source, or where there is an opening in them, or the skin is swollen and obvious, either seen or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut away at it with tweezers as much as they can hold, then pull it out; if it will not come out now, leave it.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, rotate your hand around, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the hole, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it for now, and then try again to extract it until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is an arrowhead, remove the entire arrow;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the shaft is broken, and you see fit to administer a poultice, then apply it with a broad cloth,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrowhead enters into the wound; and then pull it out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is stuck, put .1 instrument with a pointed end into it to aid in extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrowhead has penetrated, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, as much as you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits in the leg or abdomen or bladder or ribcage, and it is deep, and you can cut above it, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard against cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, then cut the wound if necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird; see the illustration:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many varieties: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the hair follicle is like the feather of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push out at the tip of an arrow, as the shape shows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of tweezers for pushing and gripping is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one heals are .xxxi., of which it has or head xvi.,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	that is to know: .ij. batants which are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the  .ij . arteries which are in .ij. temples apparent;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and .ij  veins that are in the .ij  lids of the .ij eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two windpipes which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called 'augerich'.
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, located on the left side of the neck, and common people call it the "neck vein";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called the  "fast", and is made up of the cephalic and basilic veins;
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and common people call it the   "heart vein"; and the basilic vein is located on the right side of the neck,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it the common people "wound of the belly", and it is above the navel,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and is the one that heals, which opens clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch of the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are 3 veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old cataracts and with migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the bleeding, as I told you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then constrict the patient's neck with a rope,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places, depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then grab them with your fingers, and where you feel the pulse underneath your finger, press hard;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance, and stick it under the vein all the way to the bone, then lift your hand up along the vein,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut through the skin and fascia well .2 times with the knife, and make the blood come out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then pull and tie it, so that it heals;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The bleeding of the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples, if it is worth an old emigraine,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and dryness, and habitual blindness, and the body of tears ague to the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the healer are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and the disease pulls his neck, so that both veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels pain in his stomach, and then signs inside;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lightly press the skin above the vein with your thumb, and insert the lance underneath.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and gently open the vein at the top, and milk it, just as you did with the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosen the bandage, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then bind it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their bandaging and extraction, at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as good as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraine, and for redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called a "plunger", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood come out according to the amount you want.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the collar, and ligate the vein until it is healthy and sometimes the work is done with a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too sharp; and ligate the vein crookedly, for the bone is near, and by chance the flames may break when they are delicate.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The ligature of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with thorns, and with tetter, and with ringworm, and with eye-ail, and with facial ailments;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the nature of their ligature is such that the patient should twist his neck in torture by some bond, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then cleanse it, and let the wound be cross-shaped, a little longer than wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, they may break; then stop the bleeding, as much as you need to, and then bind it with a linen bandage, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The wound of the vein of the nose is useful for nosebleed, and for bleeding in the eyes, and for facial diseases,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is chronic;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient squeezes his neck, then squeeze his nose with your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein will not open well, and the blood will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligate it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	it has the shape of a flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The juice of 2 onions helps with the constriction of the windpipe, and with inflammation, and many other illnesses, and with impetigo, and ulcers, and herpes, and stomachaches;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the properties of the juice are such that it pulls the neck out from under both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient lie on his back,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then cleanse the vein from which blood flows profusely, then draw out blood temperately, as much as is necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do the same in another vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently press all the veins,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until the morning, so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	On bleeding from the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The salves for sores on the lips above also help with ulcers in the mouth, and gum decay, and lip splits, and inner and outer lips.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the salve is to make the patient sit in front of you, and stretch his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and distinguish them by their darkness, and by the fact that around them are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	take one from each side; if you do not recognize them and are unsure,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	take the largest from each side, and similarly do the same with the two veins above and below; it is the same procedure.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	On bleeding under the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Bleeding the veins under the tongue aids after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and examine the quality of the blood; let the patient hold his tongue out and look underneath each side for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine both, but do not probe too deeply, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the arm from which blood is commonly drawn are treated in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with a very broad needle, an olive-shaped one with a sharp point, called «anesil».;
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and narrow according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame of the myrtle is very famous, and is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins that are smooth, full of thick blood, and contain thick and troubled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and the shape of the flame is like an olive tree:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed, and is for bleeding the veins gently, where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	Bleeding at the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the bleeder must bleed gently, and be wary of the artery below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he pierces the artery, and there is a gushing of blood, then he must stanch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not grip him, but burn him like a torch.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must stretch it and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you may want a vein from him, or you can heal in his place the vein in the arm: it will open clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the flame like a torch, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to find the site of bleeding, you must therefore stretch out the arm and touch it so that you can feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then mark the spot with a sign, then tie up the arm, and then apply the flame cautery.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the spot puffed up, for that is the artery; avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulge upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, then know that it is artery blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	So you therefore hasten and put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	hold the arm and leave it thus and not move it until he is healed. And be in fear and not move him until he is better.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped and he faints and medicine is not present, then press on the artery above where it is cut and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fir wood, split it, and take one half and bind it on firmly until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if he stops bleeding, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders which stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of bleeding is not difficult in various positions because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The vein in the middle helps it to bleed from the top above and the body below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful for the nerve that lies beneath, and not to pierce too deeply, and he must find the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and inflames and the nerves are injured, and by chance may not heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens in many people, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you should heal it with the instrument gently; and avoid hurting the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is bleeding between the two nerves, they will make a long cut.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The wound of the head, if it bleeds from the scalp, and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to wound with the flame of an olive branch or myrtle, for that is the safest of all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest place, and not hurt anything if one misses the first time, and one tries again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, some men's parts may become inflamed when one misses the first time, but it does not hurt at all.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bleeding is according to your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent illnesses from occurring;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and it should be performed in one of the three veins: the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, and in autumn and winter after eating when the signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first or third day after a wound.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding that is administered for illnesses does not have a set time, but when the need arises day or night, at all times and in all weathers.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one must not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	They should not bleed those who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be bled in any way, they should first cleanse the bowels with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If he has retained feces, so that the veins do not attract harmful excess fluids from the intestines to the principal limbs;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Nor should he bleed those who are too full from meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they remain so, nor the water-bound;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one of them has colic after diarrhea, and vomiting, and abdominal discharge, and frequent sexual intercourse, and from exertion, from waking and fasting, and from all that depletes the body, either through weapons or through the body itself;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly withdraw the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	Then enter the bath, if nothing else weakens him, to subtilize the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal the vein around the penis, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and avoid work, strain, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be naked and lying down, with the patient above those who are healing him, and rub the arm two or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then tighten the bandage firmly but not too tightly, for if it is too loose or too tight, it will not work.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then wet the tourniquet with the flame of a little old oil, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein below where he wants to cauterize,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not bleed and fail when he is cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins which flow like cords when cauterized, and some which are filled with winds,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts it under the flame, it draws back from the flame and cannot open the vein, and so it is with some.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow for this purpose, therefore the surgeon must be skilled in such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; if not, try again a little lower at the same site or above it, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient is fearful, leave it for one or two days and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps warm pustules will form; do not enter the bath, then restart the bleeding if she wishes.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the orifices are small, then let the blood flow gently and if you doubt that it will not flow as much as you see, then apply direct flame to that orifice itself;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work on it gently so that the wound is not inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area inflamed, do not restart the bleeding and place a little linseed oil on it, for linseed oil lightens the body of blood and is soothing in this case.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the linseed oil in every bleeding that you open veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and it makes a lump and bulge out of them, when one is put in place; so subtly the blood separates and disperses when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there is a large abscess, which happens many times, especially when it has not been lanced before the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you are in a hurry, put a sponge soaked in lukewarm water and salt on the affected area and hold it there for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you should do this after the blood comes out of the vein, and if it remains in place for several days, there will be no harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on it something of aloe or myrrh dissolved in juice of calendula officinalis, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance at the bleeding of basil: place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore placing on it anything of what we have mentioned, for perhaps it cuts into an artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its amount and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And one must make a larger wound in a person who is full and bloated, and needs bloodletting, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And one must bleed a weak person in a different way, and they should be bled a little and often, and they should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And this method of bleeding is safe from bloodletting and cutting of nerves, and it is better than letting the blood flow long or hard.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to one whose body needs cleansing, give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is scorched, then draw out blood three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, he should eat moistened bread in sweet wine before the cleansing, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he faints during the cleansing, after the flow of blood, he should inhale the scent of warm broth and subtle, aromatic syrup,
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other remedies we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for opening the veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to wound his arm and bleed again, as needed, when it is weakened by heavy bleeding, let him bleed a little at a time, according to the amount of his strength, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to wound his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to bleed elsewhere, let him bleed on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is a great deal of blood within the body that has been heated, and it causes fever; therefore one must draw out a large quantity, and widen the orifice so that it drips into a pitcher;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you have inspected all the signs of healing, and place your hand over his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come upon him from this pain
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when the healer is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you must not press hard upon it when you see the arm dislocating and blood issuing out a second time, and the wound is closed,
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is crooked so that he extends his arm suddenly, for this would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it until it heals the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is frozen in the vein comes out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on .a little. piece of salt cloth wetted in vinegar, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and don't bind it, until the abscess is settled.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healed in place of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the wound turns red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let him be bound loosely, so that the vein appears well, then heal it now from the middle, not from the broad or long side;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and the slit should be wide, and it should be healed well near the joint of the hand, and if the pus cannot come out, put the hand in hot water again and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, do not soak the hand in hot water, for one puts it there more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein of this vein is saved more from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the救命 of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Press the hand, and soak it in hot water until the vein is swollen; then release it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it heals crookedly, and if you cut it from all sides, it won't hurt at all;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't go too deep, because the nerves are completely stripped of flesh underneath,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in hot water if the pain is frozen in the wound and can't come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as necessary, then put oil and silk on the wound to close it quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is useful for the disease of the mice, and do everything as I told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	Bleeding from the ear is useful for all diseases that are beneath the body.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as well as diseases of the eyes, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneys, and old diseases of the hips, thighs, and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient should put his foot in warm water and rub the wound until it bleeds,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and put it on top of the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot they go a lot of veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then tie it on the largest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you tie it on the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are underneath, and tie it across also as though cutting; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it fails the first time, try again a second time on top of the first cut, for the wound is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and do likewise to the big toe on the other foot.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic nerve is at the back of the leg; its treatment is good for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the nature of its treatment is such that the patient lies on his back and twists upwards at the ankle four times.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then heal it in every way you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better to leave it as it is, for the place is safe, and it is very painful for many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let the blood flow as much as you want, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and compress it; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Of bleeding with leeches
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bleeding is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this bleeding without striking is in two ways: either it is all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And bleeding that is done by striking and drawing blood is done in 14 places of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	one is at the top of the head, and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two more on either side of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping glasses on the shoulders, and on the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the cupping glasses in both arms, and in both legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and suction cups on both ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood except from small veins that are dispersed throughout the body,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore it weakens one no more than bleeding from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, nor with any heat or burning sensation, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, out of necessity or habit, one must be bled, then let it be done every hour at the beginning and end of each month, and throughout all seasons.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to fart, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and others who experience bloating and redness in their face, head, and neck, and dimness of sight.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and others who spit up a drop of blood, have a swollen tongue, and taste blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who dream, and see through the night blood and wounds, and die, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we order him to fast for three hours after daybreak.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	Bleeding from the nose helps with headaches ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this bleeding is in place of the headache,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it should not be used by those of a cold complexion, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those with serious illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover from it become obese, and for this reason, the cupping glasses should be placed a little lower due to the risk of obesity.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	Cupping on the neck is in the area of the head and basil, and for this reason, it is useful for the constriction of the feet,
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and for splitting of the canal of the lungs, and for coughing, and for congestion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it must be pushed out a little, because if it holds too tightly, it injures the bowels, stomach, and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Ventilation from the two ribs of the neck is good for headache, and eye pain, and brain pain, and strangulation, and tooth root pain,
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of bleeding from the basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand while placing it so that he does not compress the artery and cause a gush of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are worth a disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The windings of the sides are also worth as much as three veins in the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from those large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instructs the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the place is naked of flesh and contains nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass which is on the buttock is good for varicose veins and for diseases underneath, and it must be a large cup made of brass, which needs to be applied with great care; and if it were too thin, it would break, causing large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Cupping glasses on the legs heal quickly because they draw blood from throughout the body and are good for old pains in the bones and joints, and the bladder, and restore the flow of fluids; they are located at the sides of the two knees and ankles, and over time they weaken the body and bring about fainting in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping glass is that you first apply it empty, and suck gently, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the area become red and swollen, and the blood vessel appear; then release, and re-apply the cupping glasses, and be mindful of the condition of the body, for there are those who have very sensitive skin, and small pores: so one should suck only once, and make wide wounds, and a little deep ones; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, one should suck twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, it must be pricked three times; and when we want to draw a little blood, we prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we prick repeatedly; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it deeply, and the ends are such that the skin is suddenly pierced,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and for those with thick and tough skin, and who have small pores, you should anoint the places where the leeches will be placed with an astringent and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is on the testicles, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is on the eye, use oil of watercress, or of lily, or chamomile, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the one we are healing has soft skin and large pores, then no oil should be used,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but should be washed after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from their bed, or from water of myrrh, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great excesses arise from old wine, or water of succory, or infusion of aniseed or camomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and one should not bleed with a leech before the bath or enema, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after bleeding,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he should fast when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are sick with cholera, and if their blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if they should eat cool things like pomegranates, endive, lettuce with garlic, and similar foods;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink possets, and warm milk, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey, and mild, aged wine, and warm milk, and possets, and pouters and young birds;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he is bled, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men triacle or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and make the drink subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leeches that are put on without bleeding are those that are put on the liver, and the mouse, and the podagra, and on the belly and the gut, and the rain, and the hip, because these members do not tolerate bleeding on their eyes,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and is only done to draw blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place cups on breasts when they are healthy; to reduce viscosity in the member, as we place cupping jars on the belly and chest to diminish the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it reduces pain, when there is obstruction or stone, and by its attractive power, the obstruction may be removed, or the stone depart from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it does when placed upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of the lungs, and in this way one fills the cupping glass with warm water, or with water in which appropriate herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has 2 inches of width and half a palm of depth, and it has on the side around the middle a small hole, just big enough to push through an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and is of iron, gently applied so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and in the middle there is a crossbar of iron or steel, to hold a candle,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they are both large and small according to the illness and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the leeches of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus place this cupping glass upon the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take a candle of wax or a ointment, and place it inside the cupping glass through the tube which is inside the cupping glass,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the flame be at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it upon the limb, and your fingers must be upon the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, they can go the vapors, and one removes the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the poultice as before, and reapply it frequently if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping glass which is used for diseases of the lungs, for all kinds of pains, there is neither a rod nor an opening, and it is only applied when it is full of water, and is placed on the affected member alone.
et c’est li forme:	and this is its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are applied only to small parts of the body where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their size, such as the lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and remove their clothing, as with women or children, and others similarly.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the nature of this medicine is such that when you find leeches in clean, fresh water without mud, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in fresh water until they are hungry and have nothing in their stomachs;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	then cleanse the vein and use a cupping glass, then rub the member until it turns red, and place the leeches on top;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat and swollen, if it is possible to put a cupping glass on them, then one should, for this is much better.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then raise the part with ease, and then with water, very gently, and then press it out;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the part is too painful after the bite of the snake, then wet .a. linen cloth in cold water and place it over the wound until the swelling is reduced;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the bite is multiple, then place vitriol powder, or gall, and similar things over it until it is reduced;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put raw peas on the area, leaving them until they are cold, and it will now stop bleeding.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take more leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the leeches will not attach, then wipe the fresh blood from the area, or prick it with a needle until the leech attaches.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	Then place them on the area, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see them defecate, then powder over a bit of aloe and ground salt, or ash, and they will stop right away.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the fools mock this chapter, which they have never seen in any ancient book or letter;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason medicine is strange in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing about it except from the study of ancient books, in which I have delved to acquire knowledge, and through experimentation, and by observing others throughout my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in the previous two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and remains on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to someone, you should quickly examine the patient on both sides, if anything holds them back, such as weakness of the body, or children, or the elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cool joints, and deer and goat meat, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have reason to suspect a hot abscess or swelling in the affected limb; then return the patient to their previous treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should feed the patient foods that promote swelling and粘性, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig stomach, offal, fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things.Et li carnes qui sont de colde norrissement, si conviennent qu’on le fasse manger a grant fin, ou il ait grand besoin; car l’os qui est brisié ne voudroit mie demourer en lieu chaut et colde, s’il le pot eviter.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And meats that are of cold nature should be eaten in moderation, or when there is great need; because a broken bone does not want to stay in a hot and cold place if it can be avoided. For with cool swelling, bruises heal faster.And the meats which are of hot norrissement, si conviennent qu’on le fasse manger en petit quanitite et en grant fin ou il ne se veult mie demourer; car l’os qui est brisié ne voudroit mie demourer en lieu colde et chaut s’il le pot eviter.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and the decrepit cannot be well set or healed according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But do not worry, reset the broken bone with a large tendon that stretches and joins the limb together, so that it enforces as it was before; and do not stop entirely from his work, and for this reason, one should nourish with coarse meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is one fracture that goes to the bone, and another in sharpening, as with the point of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, then it is all one small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner, there is its own method and appropriate instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	For there is known to be the fracture of the bone by what the place is twisted, and it appears well by displacement, and sounds when pressed by the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no crookedness nor pain to touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but there may be crookedness, or fissure, or slight fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that are mentioned below, and then hold it firmly and gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that fractures that go into the bone, and are the two parts disjoined, they should now be put in an equal point, just as in apatites;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if cold abscesses come, let them alone for a day until the abscesses are soothed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it in the same state as you can easily and gently, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold it steady, as is appropriate hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is in two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or with two strings, or with one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you bring them back together with all your skill and care, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and join the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it with your hand if it does not seem right; then set it well, and do not twist or press too hard as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the joint is set, then instruct the patient well not to move it, not while waking or sleeping, not turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and be sure that the joint is so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, then it is not at all, and one should put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep him straight so that no crookedness comes to him when he is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Because there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: so you must wrap linen cloth that is soft and thin.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And for larger limbs, such as thigh and leg: you must wrap with a wide and firm bandage, because the wide bandages embrace all of the large limb, and constrict it evenly on all sides, so that there is no swelling.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then wind light bandages around it 3 or 4 times depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all of the bandage, then go above the dislocation and tighten less, so that the dislocation is moved away a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	And soften the bandage a little bit by bit, as long as you press most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wind it around directly on the dislocated area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first hour above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the ligatures cotton or linen pads so that they are all even, then tie it all with a bandage above, and then put your splints on well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot on the abscess to soothe it, and to reduce the swelling, leave it for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold over your splints, and they should be of a medium-sized cane or of the wood that cleavers are made from, or of palm branches, and they should follow this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary for the star that one puts on the break to be a little larger and broader than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be as long as it behooves the member of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten on the stars as you did at the first hour, then tie it with a thread similarly, as you did at the first hour over the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the tighter it is, the less it hurts; and the thread should be medium-sized, not too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	because if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their laces from cords of flax, which is a great error, for the lace cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two threads' thickness between each eyelet.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is sore between the eyes of the stars after the stretching in their healthy state, then place under them linen pads or woolen bandages so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to dislocate all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the member is large, it is not advisable to place splints for more than five or seven days, or longer according to the severity of the hot abscess;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And here is the way of the ancient plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take flour that is stored on the walls of the mill, and make a paste with plenty of egg, and use this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and it is the common way of the plaster that restores the fracture in many dispositions, especially in women and young children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster to restore fractures, dislocations and twists: take 3 barley grains and ladani and inula and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, each 10 grains; aloes, 5 grains; alechil, 8 grains; and make them into powder, and mix them with plenty of egg; if the person's complexion is hot, use this plaster, because it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and it helps many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that helps with twists: take myrrh and vismalvas, each 10 grains; aloes, 8 grains; açaç, 6 grains; Armenian bole, 10 grains; and grind well, and mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of poultice for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their place, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to reduce swelling: take fresh lamb's skin and soak it in water and cooked oil, and apply it to the affected area. These poultices do not promote healing, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and reducing pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of poultice that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and deadnettle leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of poultice for restoring broken bones and reducing swelling: take the root of the marsh mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; crush and cook in wine. If the member is inflamed, cook it with moist coriander water or water.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of a stronger poultice than the previous ones, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member: take marsh mallow roots, flax seeds, borage, melilot, and Sansevieria, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; crush and cook in water with salt, or sweet water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book that one should put on the broken member to restore strength a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and says it should be between two things neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of plaster that helps with injury and pain: take mugwort and shaved human hair, or bird feathers, and bee wax, and mix them together, and make a plaster from it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not loosen it by hand every other day.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes in the area, or itching, with restlessness or swelling, then hurry and loosen it and remove the poultice immediately; and take a light cloth and sponge of moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and raise the area, until the itching stops and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on clean linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it up with a bandage, until you are sure that the hot abscess has drained;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin again with the subtle binding, and a little poultice, but do not tighten it as much as before; and with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot abscess is reduced and the redness and pain and swelling are gone, then you may need to use poultice and binding again, so begin again as you did before.Et s’il adonques ne se boit li sang, et le membre est sane, si met l’escrivein a la fine de la journee ou au commencement de la nuit;
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not remove the bandage for three, four, five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and the bone approaches the flesh beneath.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then keep the bandage tighter than before, and increase his food intake, as I said earlier; and if you see the area becoming drier than it should be, know that nourishment cannot reach it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Soak the area in warm water when you remove the bandage, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little each time.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this action, the nourishment will return to the limb, and reduce the damage caused by the foolishness of those who set the bone crookedly: it is a bad thing, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else other than causing weariness and doing it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many types of fractures are there, with diverse appearances, and the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, breaking through to the sinus below the bone, as with a blow from a polearm; this type is called a "polearm fracture."
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts into the bone without breaking through, and this type is called a  "partial fracture;" and the wound of these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a closed fracture, or a split, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the bone is broken and protruding, reaching the membrane below the bone, or sitting on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is deep in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, then this type of fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and the bone is driven inward, and the place is shattered like the potter when they work on pots; then the bone is driven inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have soft bones at the top of their heads, like children's skulls.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged, as I will explain in their own sections.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we should know all types of fractures through examination and observation, and by understanding the corrupt flesh that lies above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is understood by uncovering the bone and rubbing it with a finger, and if there is a black fracture line.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be aware of adverse events from the injury, and if you see any harmful incidents such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsion, paralysis, fever, eyes bulging out and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then healing is not possible without a doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see any frightening incidents and expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the child comes to you for the first time and it is winter, then it is necessary to cut the nail before the fourteenth day that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, then you must hurry to cut the nail before the seventh day, otherwise, the tissue underneath the nail will be corrupted and the incidents that we have mentioned will occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone comes to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the split part thus: and it is that you grasp the head of the sick person, and uncover over the bone in all the ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or the abscess is heated, treat it as it should be, and it is that you fill the place with moistened cloths in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the heated abscess is soothed and you are certain there is no flow of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you cut with a narrow chisel straight ahead, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then insert another chisel larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a variety of different tools, some narrow and some wide, and some pointed, and some made of iron; and work gently so that you do not bleed the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, then you must drill around it, so that you may apply tools with chisels, not so deep as to penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a rim or ring on top of the point, preventing the point from going beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one fits into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you may have chisels for every kind of skull; and this is the form of the three kinds of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for drilling around the broken bone is to place one chisel on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced; then move the chisel to another spot a little further, and continue all around; then cut into the space between the holes with incisions, and do this most skillfully and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand or with some instrument like tweezers or pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the sinuses.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is fitting that you remove the membrane which is remaining on the bone with any suitable instrument like an incision knife, but it must be more blunt and sharper than the other knives;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains stuck with the small bones or any scales, then loosen them gently with instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of operating is that which Galen describes, which is much safer; and he praises it highly, and his word is final.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must uncover a portion of the bone where the open fracture is located; then, once that part is uncovered, place under it the tip of this lenticular incision tool, which is shaped thus:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut on one side, but the part that is curved inwards on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike it gently with a small mallet, so that you gently chip away at the bone all around, and be careful of the membrane underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is dislocated at the bone, then the bone must be gently moved, for the bone can be moved without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, with small pieces, then one must smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, of which you should have various amounts, in order to use the most suitable one according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take a large razor at first, and then a sharper one, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hairline and subtle fractures, one must apply treatment according to its nature; and this is not a simple task for one who has dedicated their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the ulcer is exposed, then you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it over the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another doubled cloth in two or three layers, soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth. Do this as gently as you can so as not to irritate the ulcer, then apply another bandage above, but do not tighten it more than is necessary for it to hold;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it remain for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then remove the bandage and apply healing medications such as lily roots, and flour of vetch, and incense powder, and aristotle, and similar things. Make a powder from these ingredients and place it on the wound, then apply other medicated ointments without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and be sure that the wound is clean before you apply anything else, so that no ointment or pus remains, because when pus gathers under the scalp, it corroding and piercing, causing great harm to the patient. When applying something biting, it must be followed by a soothing application above;
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that one has applied, because such a virtue, then you should take some honey and mix in three parts of rose oil and smear it on a piece of cloth, and place it on the ulcer;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with various treatments until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the jawbone above are broken, one by itself, because they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the .ij. parties is broken, you should put your little finger or hole in the nail, and place the break inside your index finger, and hold it with your thumb, until the nail returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nail and the fingers cannot reach the place, you should put it in line with the top of a thick needle.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do the same and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then put on the head of the tent of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put another one on the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the ears.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some restorers say that one should moisten the tents with butter, and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they must be moistened during the preparation of egg white, and of mill powder; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is not healed, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they put on a goose's beak instead of tents, and wind a linen cloth around it, and hold the fracture, and breathe into the wound; now do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working on it, put on cerote or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little dyaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if hot abscesses do not come, put on a plaster by force, of flour of sisament, and powdered incense, confectioned with egg white, then put on light sponges, and do not tie it to the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then cut the wound, and clean out things that are foreign and foul, and bind it up, as with plasters and ointments appropriate for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, then cure it with tenting and put in splinters of linden wood, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no open wound, and the break is only on the outside, and not broken in two, with a lump inside, then it can be detected easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, then put your index finger from the right hand, and gently push the break back into place, and hold it there with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is displaced by one-third, then you must administer an extension of one-third, so that it is made equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or looseness, then they are bound with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place cerotum on the broken mandible, and place a double layer of cloth over it; and place a large, well-made plate, or a piece of leather of equal size, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it onto the muzzle as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and place an ointment over it, made from powdered milk with plenty of egg or flour of sisament, after you have removed the cerotum; and place a light linen over the ointment, and if the ointments become irritated and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it takes to heal; many are healed within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine it carefully to see if any pieces of bone are missing; then treat the wound with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain inside, then stitch up the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is cured.
de la forcele	about the armpit:
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The armpit is broken in many ways towards the shoulder, and there are three types of breaks: it can be broken and dislocated with two pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when there is no wound in the break, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one of them holds the shoulder where the collarbone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then place the break evenly between your fingers, so that its shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to stretch further, place a round pillow of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it thick according to your need; then loosen the collarbone and squeeze the pillow in your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is too deep, then the patient should lie on his back and place  a small pillow under his shoulder, and the ministers should push the shoulder upwards while the patient holds the pillow, so that the bone of the collarbone rises.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then feel the break with your fingers, and if you find it broken, you should split it; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any protruding fragment, you should cut one of the incisions that you have made; but place this instrument under the collarbone to protect the shoulder joint:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and resembles a spoon, and is not curved, and is as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has 2 handles, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt there is a hot abscess, pack the wound with bandages and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, soak a bandage in rose oil and garlic and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracture, is to put on the bone the poultice of mill-dust and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and put a pillow under the shoulder, if you need it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very large bandage of one palm in width, then place a double drape on cotton padding and anoint it; then take a thin sheet three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the sheet over the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the affected armpit; and reset it from each side, and when you see that the dislocation is aligned properly, and you clearly see that the sheet is not moving over the broken bone, then release it every day, and when the ligature eases, restrain it again;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and let the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder; and the fracture will lighten through the alignment of the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it if an evil accident does not occur, up to 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then restart the anointing, if you see that he needs it, and restrain and leave him like that until he is healed; and it is healed in the most amount of time at 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It can happen that the shoulder is dislocated widely or narrowly in its socket without force being applied; therefore, adjust it according to the shape of the dislocation and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can. Then apply flour from the mill with egg white, and light dressings, and place a double piece of fabric over this; then, put on a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is any swelling under the splint, use a linen dressing to pad it evenly; then tighten it firmly with a large bandage so that the splint does not move from its position, and check the ligature every day. Each time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side; the shoulder will be restored within 20 to 25 days. When this period is complete, remove the bandage, and be sure, for it is not a bone that can be easily put back in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes out, and not under the heart, make an incision on top, and in the bone, and do what we have said for the dislocation of the elbow to soothe the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the dislocation of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and loses flesh, and becomes thin, and vomits blood, and the bones break through the skin, and he feels it very much.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and puts a cushion between his shoulders, then presses his shoulders, and brings the sides of both ribs together with your hands, and carefully tries to put it in an even manner as much as he can, so that the shape of the bone becomes as it should be; then place poultices and bandages over the fracture site with a subtle powder of salt or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the ligature gently towards the back, and tighten it comfortably, and check every hour if it has softened, and if it has, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching that comes to the site, or pain or abscess, then do so quickly, loosen it, remove the poultice, and treat what has come in various ways of treatment; then reapply the poultice, and tighten it as much as it takes to heal.
de la brisure des costes	about the breaking of ribs:
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You should know that the breaking of ribs only occurs in the large ribs near the back, and at their ends inside, and they only bend because they are slippery; and it feels very good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you put the fracture in place, as it should be. And then apply the ointment, and hold it steady with a bandage, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declined inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also has pains in his side, and coughs up, and vomits a great quantity of blood, and it is a very serious condition, and the ancients have placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if they have those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not believe that hot abscesses will heal if they have not become heated.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if he has come, then heal him.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should place cupping glasses over the area to draw out the infection, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is a doubt that the cupping glasses might draw out the excess fluids due to the weakness of the patient.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one must cover the area with wet woolen cloth in warm oil, and place tenting between the ribs to apply pressure evenly all around, then it should be bandaged with a bandage of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone piercing through the tenting, and there is doubt about the patient's condition, then one should split open the rib cage over the site of the broken rib, and place a foreign object underneath to ward off the pleurisy; and then one should split the bone, gently pulling it apart, and then sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals. And if hot abscesses appear, then place dampened cloths in rose oil over the area; and while treating the area affected by the abscess, one should also attend to the patient's side where he is lying, until he recovers.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it can bend; and also with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will recover or not, take note if his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or straighten them, and when you prick him with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that it is deadly in many cases; but if he can move his hands and feels the pain when they are pricked and pulled, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the injury will heal if treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if a similar condition occurs in the spine, and you want to know if it will heal or not, pay attention to whether his feet are swollen, and whether the symptoms in his hands also occur, and he has windiness and urination without wanting to; and when he is turned over on his stomach, there is urination without wanting to. Know that this is deadly: if no effort is made to treat it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this event does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply an hot poultice if there is an abscess, and put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he must not sleep on the part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, cover the wound with a bandage; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with one stitch, then treat the wound with ointment and char until it is healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, which is called the "shoulder blade," place your thumb in your left hand, and the bandage equally on both hands to your ability, then apply the plaster and bandage, if you need them; then compress, and if there is a bone exposed, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone:
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Then it happens that the bones of the hip are broken, and if this happens, then there will be a little lessening in the head; and they do a long sting, and decline to the bowels, and there is pain, and piercing, and swelling where they are broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it so that you are on the break; and know which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only in the head, put equal pressure on the break so that it is at its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his belly so that the restoration of that break may be prepared for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, and then put on a board or a log, and press the break so that it does not move; and fill in the space under the ribs so that the ribcage is equalized.Et si li estele ne peut demorer sus la briseure, et que l’estele se mueve, si covient que tu mettes le malaide sus une ciaze ou un traicti, si qu’il ne se mueve, tant que li restauration soit aparaillie.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a boil appears, do not touch it until the boil is drained, and apply what we have mentioned earlier; then return to restoration, and restrain as appropriate, if there are no adverse events; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The 'adjutoires' is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is dislocated, it should be restored according to one of the two methods. The first method is to take a straight stick, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two arms with two cords, and they can be pulled up, and have the patient sit on one chair; then let him bend his broken arm over his waist until he reaches the elbow, and hold a wooden curve in one hand, then pull it up against something heavy or have an assistant stretch it downward; then have the surgeon place the fracture equal to his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to have the patient lean forward on his elbow, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other to hold under the cord and stretch each one to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tighten one cord under the fracture and one above it, and stretch each assistant to their part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you should put one cord below the elbow joint and one towards the neck, under the fracture; and likewise, if the fracture is towards the neck, then put one light cord gently without effort, so that the fracture is equal to its place, and above the neck; then have the fracture equalized as it should be, and tighten it if no abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, then do not tighten for up to seven days, and put on a poultice of milk and rose oil until the abscesses are soothed; then tighten it, and the manner of tightening is to put the poultice over the fracture, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, and tighten over the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in a resting position, unless some thing deflates it or the bone moves.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place over the fracture a splint that is larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. finger's width of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture .iij. fingers on either side; then pull on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter above the fracture, with greater force and less separation.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the splints and the stretching, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine the bandage every three days so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the nourishment does not reach the member because it is too constricted. Then loosen it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, then remove the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands over his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a flat cushion of wool of equal thickness, and examine every hour of the day and night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or the bandage become soft; then loosen it with medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned earlier, in such a way that the food reaches the first subtleties; and when he begins to recover, let the food be thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and arm to be healed within 40 days; and then one must remove the bandage and administer baths and ointments to heal the site. And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, leave it for a day or a month.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the 'forearm', one of which is small, and is that next to the armpit; and the other is large, and is that below, towards the little finger; by chance, only the large forearm may break, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small forearm is broken, its restoration and healing are easier; and when the large forearm is broken, healing is more difficult and painful than when they are both broken together. If it is only the small forearm that is broken, one should gently extend it and set it straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large forearm, one should pull harder; and extend the arm onto 1 cushion, and hold the armpit of the hand higher than the other hands, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross his arms over his chest, and have another cushion in front of him so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the minister's arm above the part below his hand, or to 1 side, and have another minister on the other side above. Then let the minister set the bone straight according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if none are out of place that poke the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do it above and on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration swollen abscesses occur, glue a cloth of cerotemade from rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth gently on top, until the swollen abscesses are soothed. And then remove the cloth, and apply the plaster made from the mill powder with egg white, then place the bandages, and let the bandage over the fracture be slightly stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it must have 6 bandages on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in both; and compress more on the fracture than elsewhere, decreasing gradually as I have said at the beginning of the chapter. And let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor harsh; and let the thread with which it is bound be made from linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And re-bandage the limb and the fracture after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad incident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should wet the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb not be tightly bound to rest. And then restart the compression, and if the bandages are softened and the bone displaced, and similar things happen, then stop.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one takes a bath so that the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too constricted, then one should loosen it a little and leave it for some days, until the nourishment flows, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things we have mentioned happen to the patient, then leave it loose for 20 days or until the healing is complete; then he may wash his hands and neck, and keep his neck even, and guard against movement and dislocation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture will be healed in 30-35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and to our fingers there are few fractures, and only sprains come but many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it is necessary that the patient cross his arms and sit upright in front of him equally; then he puts his hand on the stretched cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones, and puts them equal to each other, so that they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a bandage according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the palm of the hand, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to squeeze his broken palm; then stretch it with a long cloth, and the cast of wax should be as big as the palm of the hand, and he squeezes it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the back of the hand, you should put a cast on top and another one underneath the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, if it's the thumb, adjust it as needed and then straighten it; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index finger or another, adjust it and bind it with the neighboring healthy finger; or you can bind them all together, moving as needed, or put a cast on top of the finger, as in the case of the thumb; take care in the restoration and in the preparation of a hot abscess, and treat any that arise, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the thigh are often broken, and one can see it when they turn forward and backward; and its restoration is such that one ties a cord above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then they both stretch their cords equally to their sides; and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one cord should go towards the buttock, and the other cord below the fracture. And likewise, if it is close to the knee, then the cord should go below the knee, and the extension should be downward; then the healers put the bone equal to their two hands, as much as it is according to its natural figure, and then they put on the poultice and the bandage, if no abscesses come from it.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside and then return to your work and treatment; the wound is treated in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap the fracture with a hard bandage folded in half, and keep it in place; then return the leg so that the heels come to the root of the toe, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then go back up the leg and around the thigh with the bandage, then put splints on the fracture, and put another splint on the bone of the leg; then tighten the space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabric to ensure the binding is even, then tie three or four turns firmly over the fracture; as you go higher above the fracture, loosen the binding; then feel the two threads you inserted between the thigh and the leg, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back under to the end of the thread, so that you reach the foot; tighten it so that it does not move out of place, then leave it like that so that no abscess or swelling or anything else comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if something happens there, then loosen it and address what is happening, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are sticking out, they should be removed if possible; and if not, the area should be split open and cleaned out; and the wound is treated as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in this way with splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, this treatment does not help the patient at all.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the different complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a slit, or a hole, and it happens to all wounds, and without wounds, and this is felt by everyone.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one puts something equal to what is broken in its place, as long as it can be put together; then put on the plaster, and if necessary, put a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; then treat each accident as it needs, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You should know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, one of which is properly called the "mustelz", and the other is called the "foscile"; and all injuries occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath. Therefore administer extension, and make it even, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the break is ugly, and there are several pieces, then the extension should be lesser and lighter; and adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, then take two wooden splints that reach from the knee to just below the break on either side of the leg; then wrap two bands around them above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg should not be able to decline to the right or left, and so is well; and some administer a block under the leg that reaches from the foot up to the knee, and they place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the break where there is injury; and move the leg every day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but at times there is a break in the bones of the foot and the two bones of the little toe, and there are various dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the leg are broken, and you see the bones on top of each other, then put the patient's foot down on the ground as if he were going to walk, and then put your own foot on top of his where the bones are raised, then press them until they return to their proper place; then apply the ointment and bandages, and place a small wooden board under the leg's belly, then wrap it with cloth and other things as needed.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find that the bones are healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, treat them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint on the broken toe, according to its length, and let it be a little wider; then place under the foot that small wooden board I mentioned before, and tighten it in place. And if there are two or three, or more, broken toes, place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, since we have spoken of them; and treat each case as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the shoulder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's shoulder is broken, have her sit up straight and lean forward toward her back, and hold her from behind. Then fill the wound with cotton and insert a stone as large as an egg into it; then help the woman stand up little by little, and the cotton will come out with the stone when she stands, and the bone will return to its place with the stone. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, put it back in, and do this for seven days or until it is healed. Then the fracture will be repaired. Take a lamb's bladder, attach a straw to the opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the straw until it is inflated inside the wound; the bone will return to its place. Fill it with cotton again and leave it like that for several days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the shoulder of a man or a woman is broken, it can be restored as we have said for the bone of the hip; these fractures are not hidden from those who practice and study this art, and they should listen to my book, because I will explain different methods for their restoration. Listen, therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thighbone or shoulderbone or similar, to be treated immediately, as the remedies we have described bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then continue to treat the fracture in that same hour or that day, if no hot abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if painful abscesses arise, let healing await the ninth day, until the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, for you would bring about an evil outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible underneath the uncovered chest, you should gently put it back into place with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if extension does not work to put it back into place by hand, then reset it using this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and the width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to hold it with a grip of three or four fingers, depending on what he requires in each case of broken bone; and it should be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure when you work on the limb, and tapered at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a «palanch», because the curved head of the bone should be placed under the visible part of the bone; and press it down once, as far as it will go, and make it even against the other bone. And if the fracture is small, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you must cut into the head of the bone so that the instrument can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability; then scrape away what is stuck in the bone of harshness and fine shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Then moisten a cloth with black wine vinegar, and apply it to the wound if there is any; do not put any ointment or other medicine on the wound that might cause swelling and corruption; then administer leeches after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the bandage around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the bandage. Many fools have done this and caused their patients great harm, even death, or have caused corruption; and let the pressure be lighter on dislocated joints than other broken bones.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is serious or large, and you doubt that harm might come from it, as we have said, and there is pain in the area, then do not apply leeches; but wrap around the wound, instead of leeches, hard bandages, and tie them tightly. And when you see after a day or two that pus has formed at the wound, remove what you put on over the wine, and apply healing ointment to wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is healed and closed up.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring moves easily downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they persist for many days, and it cannot be souded but keeps slipping back, know that there are tiny pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption appears, then it must be treated according to what he says in the chapter earlier on. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, as with the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not touch it, because many die from this, but leave it until it calluses over; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the soudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the healing of a fracture, especially when it is near a joint, there remains an unsightly appearance to the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the pus is fresh: apply astringent medicines like aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, either one or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or with egg white or garlic; and place them on the wound in poultices, and hold it firmly, and do not remove for several days; then loosen it, and start another, until the inflammation is reduced; or apply a well-prepared plaster of pitch, for the nature of pitch is to remove all swelling from the limbs; if the inflammation has turned into hardness like stone, and needs to be removed, scrape off the top, and reveal the excess; or have it cut by a surgeon, so that it is removed, and healed until it is cured.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weakened after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and slender, there are many causes: one is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the limb could not receive nourishment; or due to excessive bleeding; or from too much movement, and not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, and so it is weakened.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and keep the body relaxed so that blood multiplies in him; and administer bath to him, and give him joy and rest; then put pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts to it greatly, and often wash with tepid water until the attraction goes into the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	[until the limb is] straight after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blamed, and great harm and even death may come from them; nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are fresh, they should be washed with warm water, or soft herbs such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar medicines that soften, and you make a softening plaster, such as well-prepared diaquilon, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and cook it with tallow of calf's skin or oil of sisament, and make a plaster to spread over it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with horse manure, and similar medicines that soften.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the dislocation is opened by constantly rubbing it with moist hands for a long time, and movement is given to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is awakened and hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut to the bone with a subtle incision; and put cotton and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	And if dislocation comes to anyone, then one must immediately reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the part swells and sometimes they reset it with needles in place; therefore one should not move it until the swelling has subsided, as many times this brings about a spasm and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happens, let the patient bleed and then let it be, until the abscesses are drained; then bathe the member with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the healing comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocation from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the jaws are dislocated on both sides, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little pulled out of their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from the mouth so that he cannot hold it in, nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around his speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, you must reset it quickly and not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be relaxed, in order to apply pressure evenly. And instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And watch her until she returns to her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the dislocation is difficult, especially when both mandibles are together, then use hot water and oil, until you reset it gently; do not try to force it back into place, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset in alignment, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with soft bandages moistened in cerate made from rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft strings.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor try to stretch himself, but take light food, until the pains are relieved, and let the mandibles be bound together.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not worry about opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the mandible is well tied and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and usual sores come, and by chance, intestinal problems, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a death sentence. And many die from it within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The armpit cannot be dislocated within its continuance, neither on the inside nor outside; and it has been dislocated sometimes by force, and it is well felt when this happens.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the armpit firmly with your palm, and it will return to place. Then apply the ointment and bind it up tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the joint of the shoulder near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it is forced and does dislocate, then it must be reset to its place as we have said. Then apply the ointment, bind it up tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the joint of the shoulder near the neck cannot be dislocated; if it is forced and does dislocate, then it must be reset to its place as we have said. Then apply the ointment, bind it up tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed. And likewise, the head of the spine is brought back into place when it is dislocated from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	You should know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one is at the part of the axilla below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and by chance it is dislocated above, and this rarely happens.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	It does not dislocate at the back of the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; it often dislocates below towards the axilla, especially in those who are thin; but in those who are sturdy, it dislocates with force, and goes back in with force.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that there is a concussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And a dislocation is known when it is low towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest diversity between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find in the head of the shoulder a hollow, and under the armpit the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move any movements;and tu troveras li membres desous plus lons que les sussus; et il n’est pas de bon semblant.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated on top, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly in the touch.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation does not heal on its own when it is new, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the sick hand up, then place your knees under the shoulder, and pull the joint forcefully upwards in its place; and the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it back down; this should be done quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not work as we have said within a few days, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and they should be anointed with a soothing and softening ointment, such as a decoction of aniseed, fenugreek, and sweet violet in water, and they should be massaged.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the sick person should be laid on their back, and a layer of equal wool, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder joint, then the assistant places their heel on the sto, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the hand of the sick person;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and other ministers dye the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will return right away, and if you see to reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and you should have present a man who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the armpit, and press his shoulder underneath the elbow of the patient, and lift up the elbow so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister pulls the arm of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return right away.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And they reset it also in another way: and one sticks a long peg into the ground, whose head is as wide as a penny, and neither too big nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be placed under the patient, but with a soft cloth on top, and the patient should be standing upright; then the hand should be extended downward on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return despite all these things that we have said, then perform this cure: take a brand two yards long and four fingers wide, with a pointed tip to easily enter the joint, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie it onto the top of the shoulder with soft cloth so that the shoulder does not burn the patient; then place it under the joint of the patient. Extend his arm along the length of the staff, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the tip of the hand; then place the arm on a shield four fingers wide, and extend the hand downward, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, you must put under the joint a sphere of wool equal in size, then apply the plaster prepared with flour from the mill, frankincense, and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then tighten it under the joint gradually, and tie the string over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his chest, and let his hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And one must eat little while the limbs are being comforted, for he will heal more quickly; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has accumulated, or for any other reason, then you must apply cauteries at three openings, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upward, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never return to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, at the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one administers them in another way; and treat it until it is healed.Li dislocation qui sont devers lou haut et les costes, si font par estendement, et li cauteres on li met a l’entour des costes sus la piere, car li nerfs sont tenduz sus la piere sus les costes, et li membres sont tenduz ou est la dislocation.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is aching in the limb, and with movement it becomes worse, then the patient should be bled many times until that ache is alleviated and returns to its former state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the neck is dislocated with the fingers, and it goes back with the fingers; and when it is dislocated from all sides, especially from the front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, for one sees and feels it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you should reset it as soon as any abscesses appear, for if the abscesses appear, it will be painful to reset; and by chance it may not be able to be fully reset all over, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset you should extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms should be spread out, and its hands should press according to the elbow all around, forward and backward, and push at the joint of its fingers together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and pushes from the root of the palm to the elbow which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers stretch it, so that he does not move at all with the extension; then turn the arm from each side after you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he examines the joint in his hand, he should apply oil to soften the joint, then bend it fully until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is back in place, he should apply a dry plaster with egg white, and hold it tightly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not fitting well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is firmly in place, then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels stiffness after the return of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and massage him gently, and press until he is relieved; you should put a fat sheep's tongue on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the bandage back on, and then go into the bath; and do this 2 or 3 times until he is healed; and if you see, put warm moist cow dung with butter on it, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be put back into place gently, at the same time that it was dislocated, as long as the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the method of putting it back into place is that you put the hand of the patient on a table, and extend the fingers, and look at it to make sure it is straight, then press it so that it returns to its natural state.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you should check that it is in the right place; then put the patient's back to his hand on a table, extending and bending it.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's back to his hand on the table, and the examiner should put his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it goes back now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain it with soothing plasters, warm abscesses, and leave it without re-enclosing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, then the joint will remain twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and does the patient no harm as long as the hand is weak, and cannot squeeze anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other cure except to squeeze with a cautery near the wound, and by chance nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have described, then squeeze it and leave it for five days, then loosen it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is some swelling, then moisten it with warm water and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	At times, they are dislocated on both sides of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then pull the fingers, and put the dislocation back in place as far as it will go. Then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	Let it be for two days, and then put it back in place the next day. And don't bind it as we have said, but loosen it at night, and move it during the day, and bind it again at night. Do this often until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you did before until it is healed. And do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	from the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade from the back or neck is dislocated, there is no cure, for death comes quickly with this injury.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the dislocated joints cannot be moved voluntarily, nor can they hold anything, and often a limb becomes paralyzed, or both hips, or one arm, or the other.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shoulder blade dislocates in four places; that which dislocates at the back is called "dislocation of the scapula":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the treatment if you find out that the joint dislocation occurred during childhood: then there is no treatment or healing from it at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with great words, where there is not much benefit at all;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my understanding, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the dislocation that comes at the front foot, there is no healing or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly from both sides, and cannot be cured except by that which comes properly from the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one place equally, and has a strap under him, so that he does not bend;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then insert a brand in the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the joints of the patient, and one at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two servants hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well closed, the firebrand as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms on the spine, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board of 3 yards long, and lay it under the wall, and let the patient lie on his side, and place the end of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and have the surgeon press his feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to place; and if you see that it is turning the wrong way, do it to the side that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should insert 2 firebrands at the head of the patient's arm, and 2 more towards his feet, with a palm width of space between each firebrand, both above and below.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and in each log there is a hole, through which the wire runs, and the logs are firmly planted in the ground so that they do not move; between each pair of logs there is a turning log, around which the wire turns, and between each pair of turning logs there are two small logs the length of a palm, for turning the wire;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	then tie the wire that is between the logs at the head end to the turning log, and the other wire at the foot end to the other turning log, and each of the assistants turns his wire all the way along the line, and the master straightens the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with plenty of egg white, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a board three inches wide, which covers the hunch and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a band, as we have said, and use the patient with subtle soothing until he is healed.Et quant il sont sanez, si remue l’espine et les membres de çouque costé, et li malaide est guaris.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	And when they are healed, move the spine and limbs from side to side, and the patient is cured. And if anything comes at the end of health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one believes it to be a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, because of which one must not have any presumption: by chance it could bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only result in dislocations, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: within and without, and before and behind; and more within, and slightly dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee opens more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the area is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of those who have a discharge are contrary to those mentioned earlier.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who have it in front are that their leg is well according to its length; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the groin swells, and when they go, they pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those who have it behind are that they cannot bend or straighten their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is soft, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this type of dislocation are as follows: examine whether the dislocation is recent or old, and if it persists according to its nature, there should be no concern; and no presumptuousness should be shown.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one in which the dislocation is fresh and there are four types of dislocations, quickly return the joint to its place, stretching it inward and outward, moving it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place and require no further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you must prepare a strong binding, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or tie it to the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another person stretches his hand above it in such a way that he pushes his hands underneath his heels, then the wrist of a strong cord is tied around the thigh; and another ties the head with a strong cord;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as much as the patient is raised off the ground at one time, and remains pendant.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, however, one should apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you should support the patient on their healthy side, then place the ligament over the root of the thigh, and over the joint underneath the armpit; then extend the ligament upwards towards the armpit and towards the arm.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then have another assistant grasp his arms and squeeze the large joint of the dislocated thigh and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie both feet of the patient together with a strong leather thong around their heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then let him be hung from the end of a pole, with his feet two arms' length above the ground; then command a minister to grip the head of the thigh firmly, and have another minister hanging with the patient, who grips the thigh firmly, for the joint will return immediately.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is corrected, let the patient lie as we have said for those with gout, and tighten one ligature on the affected leg properly, and another on the foot as well;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two embers, one at the head and another at the foot, and insert an ember between the thighs on the affected side;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and has moist bandages wrapped around it so that it does not hurt the patient, then he extends each limb towards him, and the assistant holds the dislocated joint steady in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it goes back into place, that is good. If not, put the patient on a table and press it as we have said in the case of the shoulder, and lay the patient on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, one should extend the affected leg gently, and according to what I have said; and the assistant should put his weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push it downward towards the knee.Et s’il ne veut aler, si covient le lever sus li pels de la gamba malaide, et li mires mette sa main en l’angre malaide, et presse ensi com nos avons dit; car il doit aler ou il nule point aler.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the back, one should not extend the affected limb downward or lift it up off the ground, but it should be treated as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said regarding lying on one's side with both hips.Et s’il ne veut aler, si covient le lever sus li pels de la gamba malaide, et li mires mette sa main en l’angre malaide, et presse ensi com nos avons dit; car il doit aler ou il nule point aler.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it shall be upon his face, and the bandage stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at rest when the patient extends his legs, and they will be straightened; then adjust the thighs, apply the ointment, and tie it with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then loosen the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are straight, then bind it again as before and leave it for 3 days; then loosen the bandage and make him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	There are three ways that the knee can be dislocated: that is, inside, outside, and behind; it cannot be dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, then know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit up straight and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your palms and pull it gently between your fingers, then bend both sides of the knee; and another minister extends his foot while you pull, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh easily.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the plaster on top, and tie the leg to the thigh, and bind them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then loosen it; and the patient must not walk, until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not straight, strong extension is administered as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it hurts in front of the part where it was dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the movements should be easy, and when he is only stretched out with his hands it should be slightly extended.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when he is healed from everything, you should have the patient sit upright and hold his leg firmly with .i. minister above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left hand .ij. times, then extend it upwards, and bend the foot upwards nicely;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, that is good; if not, then restart the operation, for it will come back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if he cannot come back like that, then have the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and wrap a cloth around it, so that he does not kick the stake;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have one assistant hold his thigh, and another assistant stretch out the foot with their hands or with a cord, so that it lies on the collar of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each assistant stretches equally, and the stake is driven further between the patient's thighs to hold him in place when he is stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then have the patient hold the dislocated joint in his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return to its place gradually.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, then apply the plaster and gauze, and tighten it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, taking care not to press too hard on the nerves behind the ankle.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, tighten it again. Then remove it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should be able to walk within four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he walks before that time, there is no guarantee that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes, you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	of the armpits
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they should be gently extended without force, and that is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the lower back near the feet, you should have the patient lie on their back on a flat surface or a table, completely straight, and place your foot over the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place underneath the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then stretch it out strongly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not confident in the treatment, unless you are wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, soothe the hot abscess, and leave the disease in God's hand if you don't see hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then put the limb back into place so that the hot abscesses heal.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then administer hot abscess-soothing things and treat the wound as needed with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, set the bones and do what we have said about simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will benefit you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your soul and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here ends the romance of physics
