O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the last part of the art of medicine, with its explanations and its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this manual, which is the handiwork of hands, that is to say, "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is strange from all parts, it is very difficult to know and comprehend its science and scope, and there is no delay in its force except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	For it seems to me that I should refresh this treatise with the arrangement of this manual according to the path of explanations and declarations and abbreviations; and I will come with the forms of the ferroys of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the assistance of the declaration and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that good masters of hands are not found in our time, the art of medicine is weakened.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who deals with it must surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and unions and separations of bones, and has knowledge of the nerves and joints and numbers of the fingers, and the movement and veins moving and resting, and their outlet.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the non-professional with work is little, and with his hands is less; and most of all in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that he who is not familiar with the things mentioned above should be careful not to make mistakes and not to harm people; thus I have often wanted many of those who deal with this science and who abandon themselves to theory and not to experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut into the arteries in the neck; for so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if they cut him open, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took in our duke's leg that was broken, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the physician, out of ignorance, cut off the fracture from the wound by means of a strong ligature, and left the wound uncovered, and finished it like this; and he commanded that it should not be unbound; and he delayed it so that the leg completely vớiered, and the bone went to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come to loosen the leg; and when I loosened it, he was at peace and felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, all roads to recovery for this member were already closed, and it could not be cured; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the members were completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder which broke out into an abscess, and then inflamed because of the evil of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is purulent because of melancholy humor, cannot be touched with iron unless it is in its right place so that one can completely cut off what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, very fine son, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For as much as it is necessary for you to keep yourself safe, so that the foolish talk of others cannot harm you; If you take your weapons in concord, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that, through the grace of God, you come to salvation and are loosed; and leave behind you probable diseases of grief health; and lay aside your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Gaalien continues his treatise with the following: "Do not take on the care of a sick person, lest you be called a fool yourself.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauterizations and water-based medicinal treatments, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the beginning to the end, including the forms of instruments, the fermness of cauterization, and everything else necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with cutting, piercing, suction cups, wounds, extracting arrows, and similar matters; it also contains instructions on the order and shapes of tools.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and torments, and similar matters; it also contains instructions on the order and shapes of tools as far as cutting is concerned, and some forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I speak about the quality of aid and the harm of each kind.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the most distant word and subtle science and its responses; and many wise men would speak about it, and agree with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the time.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that universal aid cauterizes all complexes, except for two: one is hot in nature and matter, the other dry in nature and matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, they all agreed and said that cautery is great aid; and one said the opposite: That cautery is not useful for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire if it is hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from heat or dryness; and he who spoke opposite said that cautery is great aid for hot and dry disease which comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And any way, none but he who has tried it, and who knows by long practice the nature of the cautery, and the diversity of the complexions of men, their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the effects and space of the ten; for the other complexions we have no fear, even if they are cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this should be gathered together and agreed upon to the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that the fire cautery is better for certain secretions and of greater value than the medicinal fire cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by removing, and cause malady by its high heat and by the goodness of its substance; and perhaps it does not harm, unless there is too much of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And which I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the truth of things; and for that reason I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is given to fire, and the quality of the work, how it rejects diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in proofing; so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be made in what season the caultures should be performed, and let them be prayed for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all seasons, because the harm caused by what is to come can be prevented by the aid of cauterization; and most especially, if cauterization is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, my son, as they do, for when a disease is healed by cauterization, it never returns; and that is how it should be; but it is not like that, for cauterization is no more than medicine that changes the surface, dries up the humors that cause pain, and has more power than medicine due to its swiftness, and due to its virtue and dignity.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l'aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n'est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And there are things that can be done so that the disease comes according to the complexion of the sick and the place of the disease and its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him by acquiring meat and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in the place where he has a little excess and moisture, as with deep cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and partial pain does not return again; but it happens a little.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, open well, for fire cauterization is a medicine from the inside; do not follow the foolish looks of others.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Therefore, the ancient ones used to say that gold-based instruments are more efficacious than those made of iron, and they said that fire cauterization was effective only due to the quality of gold and its high purity; they also stated that the heat of the cauterization does not cause scarring, but this is not always true, as we have proven through experience, and it is true in some people; gold-based cauterization is more efficacious than iron-based, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And whenever you heat gold-based instruments, you will not be able to tell by the color of gold alone when they are hot enough, and they often cool down quickly; and if you heat them too much, they turn black in the fire, which is a sufficient impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter to the end, because the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is useful for the head when it is moist or cold, and because of many humors that descend from the hair, and to the ears, and by a lot of dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and especially because of all the diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, lameness, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged with a solu
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the cross between your hands, and have them grasp his pelvis; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his penis between his two roots; and if it comes to your two hands, let it bleed a little, then heat the fire called "olive" from which there is this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the mark of ink, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in turning; then let your hand fall aside, and return to the mark again, and if you do not see the bone a little, then start the fire again until you see the bone as I told you; after that, take a piece of rope, and put soft cotton inside, and put it on the mark, and leave it for three days; after that, put wet cotton inside the cloth, and let it be there until it is heated by the fire; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrarchymy", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old man said that when the wound is left to fester longer, it festers more; and for this reason if aid is not prompt.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should allow the cauterization to last so long that part of the bone is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one should allow the cauterization to last so long and burn it so hard that the humor is pushed out of the bone by as much as a woman puts fire in her cauldron for what is needed to be expelled; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; then it must be cured and made whole.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in any way except that in some men where there is a chance of fear; and it seems to me that I should allow this; for the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and moreover, when the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems more safe and mild to me, and of this one I use in such a way that it is salutary.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old age pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long enough, then you must use yeris and pills that are called 'cochie', and head purging and oils and ointments; and if you do the cautery that we have mentioned above, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient is of strong nature, and is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery to him as little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have made the fire cautery on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we said above, and made the cautery where it is called 'vesselz'; and place the cupping vessels there; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: the patient feels much more severe pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about that later; and it is necessary that the cornes cauteries be thinner than those of which we made the head cautery, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	If you want to cauterize with fire, order the patient to let his hair grow long and even;
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly in one part of the head there is pain that spreads to the oil, and the head is cured with medicines, and all other cures that I have said in the division of diseases do not help: then you do cauterization according to two ways, namely with water medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	If you want to cauterize with water medicine, you squeeze a garlic clove and extract the juice from it, and then apply it to the head, keeping it there for a short time, and then you let it rest on the skin; when it has soaked into the skin, if it is dry, and you tie and tighten it well, and leave it like that for twelve hours; and then you release it and treat it with garlic juice, leaving the wound like that for two or three days; then put cotton wicks in butter to soak up the juice.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of pain as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this medicine, which I have written about in my book on burning medicines, does not work, then use another medicine that burns.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery, if done according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "close" because the head is made in the form of a hole or it has I bit of a curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and put it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the pain of the wound is burned; and release your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, which is done quickly, and escapes a lot of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, wet cotton with oil, and put it on the spot for three days; then dip the cotton in butter, and then treat the sore spot with pain until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer called "cultellare", all along the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine, as we have previously said in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before mentioned with medicine and iron does not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus mark on the aching spot a line of half an inch long, and hold your hand back once, and strain it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come to the bone; and guard against the jaw that moves when you yawn, and let the muscle relax only as much as it needs to move, and do not let spasms come to the disease, and guard against the release of blood from the artery when it is cop
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these fire cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with a hot iron at the base as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said, or the extract of the artery with the cauterization that has II knives; and these fire cauterizations are better than those and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	In order to prevent pain in the ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and you have used the soluable medicines and other cures we spoke of in the division on ears, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", whose form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying this "poins" all around the ear that hurts, or around both where the pain is felt at the base of the ear then moving away from the root of the ear, you will have X points around each ear; then heal the area until it is well.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	which must be cured by cautery is not more dangerous than those that move with fluidity, as we have said in the division of illnesses; and do not make any cauterization on the similarities that come from scalds and vomit of fish.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similarity of torture that moves with fluidity from hydromion and purgatives of the head and gargling, and it does not matter, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further away on the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that is healthy, and let the cautery burn for half of what it takes to be burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the cuttlefish that we have put before you, but it is a little more delicate and it is necessary that the knives are a little larger; after treatment, set it in place as I said above, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexies are old and you treat them as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: II on the two horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I heat up what is called a "vessel" as we have said before, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	with salt
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large years and pilules of the brain; after reposing the head of the patient entirely, and putting on it, at the nape, the plaster of saffron, which is written or said to be made into plasters; and this is the way of cauterizing: do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy then it is good; and if it is not, three fire cauterizations should be made to the scalp from the base of the neck down, with two inches between each cauterization; and the treatment should continue as with the others, until the hair begins to grow again; but if there are signs that the hair will not grow again, one cauterization should be made in the middle, and two others on either side of the head; and the treatment should continue until the scalp is healed; and let the cauterizations which are called "olives" be performed as I have said above.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold at the top
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the scalp be cleansed from the front and back and from the sides, as we have said above; after this, the scalp of the patient should be treated with fire cauterizations, one on top and another on each side, and one behind and three at the base of the neck; and if there is more need, and the hair is wet and the patient suffers, and the patient is worse, then three cauterizations should be made at the back of the head; and leave it until the fire has burned the most recent scar, and lift your hand; after this, treat the scalp until it is healed, and let the cauterizations which are called "olives" be performed as we have said above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	For the epileptic person, fire cautery should only be used for those who are fleumatic, and first the brain must be cleansed and other treatments must be given as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from penance.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot endure the punishment, then make gargarisms and chewing to cleanse the brain frequently with bonecies; after that, place the head in the middle and apply the fire as we have said above, and also on the neck and back of the spine, and apply the fire olive-wise as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, then make the fire cautery in this way:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excess fluids or腐爛腐爛的濕潤物， then half-burn half-curse as we have said to the one who has paralysis。
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy is the excess of decline to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moistened， then he does something to drink so that the brain is purified， according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After remove the head of the sick; after make a turban well made, as well as a circle, if put it under the head; and let the sick lie in good position from all sides; then present the liniment, and anoint with old beeswax; and heat it slightly with fire so that he can bear it; after empty the circle inside under the head, and let it cool off; and make this to the sick every week once with other good government， until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if he pricks at his base, then hold him steady so that he does not move until they grow.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	For this way of cauterizing makes the skull smooth and even; and then put cotton dipped in water on it, and in grease of lamb.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awed comes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do this to the patient purifying thing, and warding away all moisture, and making him sweat or bathe many times while fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Then instruct him to rub his head again, and make a fire cautery on the head, and make II cauteries on the temples because they are both dislocated from awed and both together, or one is dislocated and one is not; and wrap all the cauterized places with linen bandages, and ward off any blood loss, and if too much blood comes out, then stop it by tying it up tightly as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in cauterization how to stop it; and never is cauterization done or stopped with heat from behind the two bones.
dou cors des larmes	the eyes of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or release the arteries that are in appearance at the top of the head; and one can see that it is from cold, wet, phlegmatic surplus, therefore I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the chapter descending to the tears: I cauterize the top, and two cauterizes on the two temples, and two cauterizes where they pricked out the two bones; and if it is necessary more, then he makes a good cauterizing above the brow with any small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the eyes of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have mixed the medicines as we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then done three nights for the sick with two cups of wine; after that he raises his head, and makes a cautery at the base where the hair grows; and make two cauteries of the cautery called 'clavilis' on the two sides, a little burned the hair; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	from this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you have made two cauteries on the two sides as long as the hairs are; and do not let your hand off until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	hair that holds oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Now the hair that holds the oil has come to the doctor's office, and it grabs the oil, and he makes two types of fire: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your table; after that, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure which is also like the shell of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign to pull out the hairs; then put cotton wet in resin and muscled amber on the oil, and heat up the cautery so that it is hot: this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the burns are in place; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the touch of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton soaked in oil in a poultice until the scorching is over; after the wound has been dressed until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hair comes back, and the paper is softened then start again with the cautery on the same place as before, and if the hair is gone, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural position, and remains even, and does not touch the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical treatise suggests that the patient should be instructed to let the hair grow long and even, then make a parchment into the shape of an olive leaf; then take French soap and warm water, each 1 oz., and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it doesn't cool down, then, as you have made the shape of an olive leaf, put it on the paper; and if the disease is in one place only, then apply it there, and also in both places; and soak the cotton with oil, and the patient's foot should be in your hand, and put two drops of the medicine on it every time the patient feels tingling from the medicine, because he feels tingling as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have had this for a long time, keep the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is over, raise up the lid of the mouth, and let it be raised as if it had been raised by fire or by cutting; and if so, that's good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put the medicine back on the lid again where it has not worked, as long as your hairs are long and even, and then put cotton soaked in oil on top for as long as the burning is, after treating the wound that is called 'diahene' and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to, make sure that your wound is not affected by the medicine's eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft again, and the hair is pricked in the oil, start again the medicine on that same lid which has been softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after treating until it heals; and this is the form of the burn of the palm:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size, and according to this one is bound; and is not answered the straight way to him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you cure fistulas as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is appropriate that you make a cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dry the hair with a towel or with persil juice on oil; then heat the cauterizer, and when it is hot, touch it to the hair at the root, keeping it there until it burns; if you see, so point it from one hair to another, and if you do not see, so touch it as a tent; but all the same, this that is burned should be for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Apres press the fistula shall be opened, and there treat it with perspiration and drying; and if it is closed, then operate, and try firmly the bow; after put on the cauterizer so that your hand is not at fault; and place the cauterizer in the grease of the oil, and corrupt.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the cauterization just up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cauterization again, and if you need more, let it rest for III days; after put on cotton wet in grease, and cure with drying medicine until it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what came out in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way to cauterize a fistula, which no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Do you understand about a fistula, and pierce the place; after that put in the fine needle so as it is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I make it in the quantity of a .Z. of drop; and hold your hand firm whereon the needle is, so that the drops fall not away, but you put the oil to the cotton wet in water or vinegar: the drop, if artfully put at the place of the fistula, and healed per marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the fire that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, then you should give a push to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the bridge of the nose according to what it is fitting in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	creases in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouth times have creases in the lips that are called "hair", and sometimes in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these creases as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not profit, then apply a small surgical cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it in the creases as long as it comes out clear; after, clean it with oil until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after having made pus and it is dry and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not profit: then you must take a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after, you plug or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes out at the bottom of it, and do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in the treatment, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you must discover the place and cut off the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, but this does not work, then put the chief of the illness in your mouth; after that heat the cautery so that its form comes out in a certain way as you put a chain on the tooth; and put the cautery hot inside, and hold for so long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then let go your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after that fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it sit for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the teeth that were moving are fixed, the gums that were softened are tightened, and the moisture that has corrupted it is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, either in the cold or the heat, and medicines do not help, then there is a need for two types of cauterization: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cheesecloth, and the tip into a teaspoon of iron or bronze; then take cotton and wrap it over the tip of a tent, and moisten it with butter and place it on the tooth tenderly and keep it as long as it cools down; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and the wool are moistened with butter and placed on the tooth tenderly, and put on a piece of iron hot enough for the fire to come to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Cautery with fire if it is such that you squeeze a piece of iron or bronze wire, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not come into the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, for it will form a blister afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be increased the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then he should swallow it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery of the tooth that you will, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	from scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold moisture and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the head of the cane so that there comes what form, and has II openings for the fumes to come out on the cane from the other side; and put the cane hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, as long as it comes to the root of the abscess; and let the abscess be small if you put cane according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for III days; and put cotton wet with butter on it as long as the burning is over; then cure the wound of ointments and tents until it is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails on the cheeks and most especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by laxative medicines; afterwards, apply cauterization to the root of the throat, and you must not go up to the throat, and do not dare to use a cure except with water.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, apply another cauterization to the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and the cauterization which is called 'clavicle', so that we have the shape in front; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the mouth are caused by cold moisture, and the patient does not have a fever or any pain, and the disease is old, then apply two cauterizations to the lip at the edges; and another cauterization goes up between the nipples; and the cauterization which is called 'clavicle' according to the shape that is in front.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make the fire cautery by poking all the cauterizes called "poins" that are before in the disease of the ears; and let the pokes be until XXX, or more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards, treat the wound according to what has been said before, and let the cauterizes be of three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those where the cautery is lighter, for those that you make III in a row.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, be gentle on the patient on his back and on his ribcage; afterwards, lift up what is inside the little hole with your right hand; and if the joint moves inside, then heat the cautery that has two holes here according to this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize it as long as he pierces up to the cost, and comes out with the figure of the cautery all together IIII cauteries; and for this is made cauterization with the cautery that has III ners, because the figure of the cauterization are there cauteries; and they are the nervi according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has III ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is placed on this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the fire on the skin to burn it slightly with a hook; after that let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happens, then do a cauterization on the thick part of the cautery with an edge, or more cauterizations in puncturing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed up, and the moisture is dried up from it, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come chills and moisture until he was removed from his complexion, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and the customs of treatment accustomed, and does not profit, so it is necessary that the patient be covered with a blanket, and spread his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From then after him do three cauteries with the milk of the pis for the quantity of a double, to all the cauterizes clavile, and two cauteries defuers on the two sides as much as the shape of the cauterizes is at three angles, and have space between the one and another that they are not joined together when they go with the fire; and be the cautery so perfect that it scorches the two parts of the wound, and is the shape of the cauterizes according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you cauterize with a large cauldron the stomach according to this form; and he who will have fear of this cauldron, cauterize by piercing and signing on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize all the cauldron which is called "pinch".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure for the cure that we have had before, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it comes with pain from cold and moisture and strong windiness, as long as it is too full of its natural composition due to excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in the divisions, and it does him no good, unless he is cautious about his diet; and mark three cauterizes according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, far away from each other, the thickness of two fingers; and let the cauldron be long on the chest, and do not press very hard on all the cauldron; and let it be burned with such heat that half of it is burned, and let the patient lie down on his back; and if he cannot, then let him stretch out his legs, and lift his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterizes of the cutlet, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn up all the flesh, for you would make the whole body dry; and let it come only to the eyelid, because the cure is very subtle in place, and the sight to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can tell whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, then the patient feels pain that is not too great; and if it is in the capsule, then the pain is very intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure has ended the pus, let the patient be quiet on his head; and then sign with your hand where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that is like a raisin, so as to get the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautery until the curings be burned, and come as far as the swelling, so that the whole porridge be burnt; after the cure according to the cure of poultices until it is sound; and it only concerns that this cautery use no fire but they who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by which hands these diseases have been corrupted on any occasion.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it may be able to work firmly, and always I seem that he moves less.
dou cautere de pleuresin	and for the pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and for the pleurisy The old people used to say that one should make plagues of root of aristoloche, and in this way: take a root of aristoloche long, the largest that you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; then moisten it with oil, and heat it on the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the clavicle and the collarbone, and I small cauterizes a little down in the part that is sore by the beard; and cauterize II between the fifth rib and the sixth, turning back a little; and let me suck the milk, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and another between two shoulders after the milk has passed; and do not press your hand, otherwise make it open as if you are smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no one of the ancients said that any man use fire cautery resembling a razor, and he blows it and puts it between the ribs until it comes to the apoplectic seizure; and he leaps out of pain, as we have said in the apoplexy of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse with any of the three ways we have spoken about, and it does not benefit, then they put three kinds of fire cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is this: you make three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery for the liver that we have spoken about before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient sneeze behind him; and another way of cauterizing is this: you heat the cautery which has two roots, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and bring the burn which is in place of the mouse, or the knife's edge comes from the left, and are the elevations where you bring the burn according to the burn, according to the length of the back, and the cautery is according to the breadth of the back.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After putting the two flames so that their heat is felt on both sides, and then applying the fire cautery, and so on for four times; if you see, then cauterize all of it with three flames.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has been exposed to the air for a long time, and this is what we have experienced that the other cure in front of it said.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Do not cauterize with the method called "asclepiades".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you have performed the cure according to the ways that we have mentioned in the divisions, and your cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place the pyre.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the fire cautery to go away pus long time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would be quick, and both intentions will come together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is like a key that we have in front of us; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described in front.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints swell up in those who are hydropic and are pale yellow in color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and gently remove your hand from the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deep, otherwise the pale yellow would come out, and let the cauterization be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the scrotum; let the cauterization be long, one behind the knee and the other in front, between the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without treating, that they burn themselves; after which treat the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of the hospital
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest it are present in the stomach and in the intestines are affec ted, and cannot be treated by any means of treatment; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do I make a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or a cauterization of the stomach, circulating; and four cauterizations around the navel finely to all the cauterizations that are clavels, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a fire cautery on his hand, and make each finger a cautery, and two small cauteries in his stomach to relieve the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the root, or one or more, and they are old and there are big cold and moist corrupting humors, and they are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit if fire cauterizations are made: three on the spine of the back, that which is all farther from the anus, little by little and triangularly, and one cauterization above the two; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and meat doesn't cook there, and the face swells, then leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care, let it rest as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the callus which is called "thelula
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you chop off the callus, if it gets hot, heat the cauldron which seems like a razor, and then let it burn completely over the chopped callus; and leave it for as long as your hand can stand it, so that the cauterization comes to the birth of the vein, from which it is cut; do this once or twice, and if there is much of a callus, cauterize each one as we have said; after the use of beneficial ointments as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cauldron on the chin, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a bad wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear to have it cut or opened, we will tell you in your place, that there comes a disease which cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no opening of the vein, and it is inflamed and wet with pus and corruption, then you must provide the whole tent with a delicate substance, and be sure that you know exactly how much of the tent it is.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauldron that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restarting the cauldron as long as the corruption and putrid flesh are burned, once or twice, according to the amount of salve needed; and be careful not to touch the nerves that are inside, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula runs through the belly and intestine, be careful of these veins, and do not pierce them except in the flesh, and believe that they are not dangerous; after healing the vein as long as it is healthy, and if the veins have been cut, and the bone has been exposed for a long time, then know that the vein is completely healed; and if the bones have not been exposed, know that the veins have been split, and the bone has corroded at the bottom; and so, as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys and great windiness comes, and does not take a woman's shape, then it is good that you make a cauterization on the kidneys from both sides with the ring cautery which we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and greater help will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a cauterization in the region of the outside on the bladder, where the hair of the genitals begins, and one on each side, and each as long as a finger; and you make a cauterization on the back, where it is needed; and you make the ring cauterizations according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	from the wound
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and come late; and when they do come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make III heat-cauteries around the loins, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be claved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away from the other when they are measured together; and the joints are found to be wet inside, then you must make a semblant cautery on the hip joint box at I semblant cautery in the circle, and sign before the joint as it comes back into place so that the joint is within the circle; and if it is such cauteries as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present with you, make three cauteries of the olive oil, and let the cauteries also be perfect like all the others; and treat as long as he is well.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have described in the dislocation, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with large pills of foul-smelling pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards make the cautery; and the way of the cautery is according to two ways: that is to say, together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is this: that you cauterize over the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make it deep and wide, and leave between each cautery the space of two, and let the cauteries be olive oil; never do a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the fire cautery is done in the shape of a circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the flesh of the cur is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain reaches only to the thigh and leg, then two fire cauterizations are made there where the patient says the pain is; and one cauterization on top of the ankle three times, two on the left side; and either the cauterization is cutaneous, or the flesh of the cur is burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or almost to the heel, then the fire cautery is made there, called "two points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is a profession, do it more; and if he feels that the pain is in the knee towards the thigh, I make a fire cautery with a knife or circular cautery, and give you good care for all your cauterizes so that you do not leave them as much as the cauterize burns the nerves and large arteries, and does not cause great damage and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have made a fire cautery on the foot of the leg and left it until the whole leg was swollen, and the toes too, and all were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution for the belly which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise said in the cauterizing of the hernia, for this is the way, make it one such iron and be at the head also thick as a finger, or a little less, and be between cheeks and also like fingers, and I have a little space of an inch; and let the cheeks be above the two parts, and also like fingers, and there is such a good iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et soit eschaufez tant qu'il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sur lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d'oignement tant qu'il soit sanez.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And let it be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the box of the ill hip, and let it turn around on the healthy rib; and let one cauterize it once and let it rest for three days; and then make a plaster with butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of dressing as long as he is well.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	AlbuCasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its smell, and few see who use it; and yet this is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts itself.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After put on the chest of the thigh lying on its back on a bed, and quickly raise your hand much over the chest of the thigh; after get between the two circles of hot awine that is heated in the fire I pot, and let it sit for an hour ten, and suffer the patient the heat and the burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it has shown to be effective both with fire and without; and when the effect has passed, lower your hand with the instrument and raise the thigh of soft awine, and leave it so for three days, and put on tar until that which is black from scorching has come out; and let it be infected for three days; and he who is behind will help after the treatment of ointments as long as he is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or only to the leg, make him the instrument that heats according to what you have done in the chest, and this is the way of hot awine, and I have written it up or medical treatment for correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Get alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take a small hole somewhere that the tip of a scraper can enter; and place that pot on top of another well-plastered pot, and put alkali and charcoal and sweet water in it, as much as there is of the latter two above the plastered surface, so you can use your hand to mix them together well; and leave it like that until it has been heated a little by the fire and you see where the well-plastered pot is; then take all that water, and pour it over the charcoal and alkali as if in front of you.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And so if it is very hot and has become calm in the way that work of medicine and other cauterizations is done with fire, for these are all mixed together as follows:
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Gallians tells us of a cure in which an honourable man was cured of the pain in the thigh and sciatic nerve, and he drank milk, and said that they made no other cure, and that he was cured all at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you squeeze the green and fresh tarragon well and dry, and grind it with a little fat, and put it on the thigh and leg and foot where the pain is, and let it rest; and leave it for three hours and in the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bathe until the body is a little warm, and let him lie down, and the pain will go away all of it and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with these medications unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dycoraides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the end of a deer's horn, it should be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and rub it with old oil, and put it on the crease that is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called the sole.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take a piece of dry deer's horn, and hold it over the fire until it is red-hot, and rub it on the crease that is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called the sole, and leave it there until it is cool; and repeat this often, and do not cease to do so until you think that the pain has ceased up to the hip, and that the injury is healed; and this way of cauterizing is called 'cauterization with a deer's horn'.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from riding or from impact or from too much discharge, or from the appearance of cold material spread, none of these appearances are worth cauterization except for that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that the patient be voided of foul pills or other things, that a line be made on his back where the pain is, three lines signed with an inch, and as many cauterizations as the virtue and quantity allow the patient to endure; and let the cauterization be done according to the one called "poins"; and if you see, do III or IV cauterizations at the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 종종 이 질병이 어린 아이들에게 발생하며, 그들이 일어날 때 뒷통수 부분의 근육이 조여지고 아프다는 신호를 받습니다. 그런 다음 뒷통수 부분에 있는 여러 갈래의 척추와 다른 척추 부분에서 통증과 부어오르는 증상이 나타납니다.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	As you see this one and as you treat it, if you cauterize it with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery is applied evenly to each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize between the vertebrae with fire that is two or three lines wide, and let the burns be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After you have cured it as we have said, and guard that you do not apply fire to a ganglion which is in the spine of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When there is pain in the joints due to moisture that spreads to each limb, and when the pain comes from a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicines, then cure it with fire in this way: make the fire cautery between the joints of the foot, and let the fire cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary for you to hold on the face of the foot, make cautery all the way down with "no point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, make cautery on each knee III cauteries or IIII of each part, with olive cauterization; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand firm except for as long as the skin of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, administer the cauterization that we have spoken about in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, do a single line of cauterization; and if there is still pain in two joints and in the hair of the hand, cauterize each joint and the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and give him medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this good government and you purge the pus, then you will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the balls descend as coins and it is newly, then it is necessary that when you look at him curiously, he does not vomit; and uses things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after he sits down on his back between your hands, and orders him to wet his beard as long as the balls are repaired, and take them in your hands, and sign from the bottom of the rupture on the bone of the finger, and everything has a form like half a circle above the chest; then heat the fire with this shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it drips dry.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then let the balls come back to their place; and let the assistant wet his hand so that he does not turn back; and well work on the legs of the patient, and put a cloth and a servant on the legs, and another one under the feet that wet his hands; then put the fire cautery on his limb until your entire hand reaches the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again several times until you come to the bone; and be careful so that the ball does not slide when you make the cauterization; that you do not burn him; and that by this disease the patient does not die, or another misfortune.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you reach the bone with the fire cautery, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the fire cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great ones according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cauterization with a burse until the scorching is done; after this cure other remedies until he is well, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that these treatments be prolonged, so that the ball does not slide when he tries to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is given to him, and it is applied for another forty days; and he has good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too much noise; and when he follows this teaching, he completely recovers.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his paste.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, make the cauterization of the third cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it must be cauterized at the cautery's three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the area of the incision and make a line across its width, and another below it, and with your hand press down on all the cauterized cloven.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, or from sitting or being hurt, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cure does not help, then it is appropriate that he be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poyn", and be cauterized according to the length of the member, and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location from torments and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed with the first cauterization, that is good; but if not, then begin another cauterization on top of that one, for this custom is that it must move to the member that is closest, so that you must make the cauterizations as long as the patient remains unhealed.
de meselerie	of relaxation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The meseile are helped not at all by the cautery with great help, and most often the disease that comes from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that the fire cautery is causing the patient discomfort, then apply a cold compress to soothe the pain. To do this, wrap the compress around the patient's hand and leave it there until the heat subsides; then remove the compress slowly so as not to cause further distress. 
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si le patient est très malade, il faut lui faire des cautères avec du feu, comme nous l'avons dit plus haut, et des cautères sur la moelle épinière du cou, et six cautères sur la moelle épinière du dos, et un grand cautère sur la nuque, et un autre petit sur le cœur, et deux petits cautères sur les épaules, et deux sur les côtes, et un sur chaque joint de main et de pied, et un sur la membrane qui recouvre l'estomac. Il faut également surveiller attentivement les nerfs qui se trouvent derrière l'épaule, pour ne pas les brûler, et ne jamais faire de cautère sur l'os du poignet ou sur celui de l'estomac, ni sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And if the patient is very sick, you must make fire cauters as we have said above, and cauters on the spinal cord at the back of the neck, and six cauters on the spinal cord at the back, and one large cauter on the back of the neck, and one small one on the heart, and two small ones on the shoulders, and two on the ribs, and one on each joint of hand and foot, and one on the membrane that covers the stomach. You must also carefully watch the nerves behind the shoulder so as not to burn them, and never make a cauter on the wrist bone or on the stomach bone, nor on the liver. Know that when you do more cauters, the help is greater and the benefit is greater; know also that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing the head of flour with honey and other cures as long as it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes in any member and is cured with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healthy, then make cauterization on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little inside the cure of the ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is it made cauterization and by hand and at the foot and back, to the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is osteochondritis; and nevertheless it does not matter if there are no people who know the members and outlets of moving the neck.
de albaras	of albars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the "albaras" disease is awakened and the medicine's art does not work, then cauterize it with a fire cautery that is perfect in proportion to the amount of the medicine, until the pale color is raised and changed; then cure it with flour of oats and lentils, mixed with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of lambs and of plovers, each part separately; and then mix them together and bind them with a cloth and apply them to the affected area until they are healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for leprosy by fire cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When leprosy comes at the beginning and you notice it, if you cauterize it with a fire cautery that seems like a circle all around the leprous spot.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet some say that you should also make a fire cauterization in the middle of the leprous spot; and yet I do not think this is good, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it work this way; and the most correct thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the fire cautery called "circle," as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying or because of the excess fluid that it causes or because of the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the heat; then you see him hurry to die: so cauterize him with small cauterization stings by poking; then leave it like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see him pierce all the cauterization, so hot is the cauterization of which this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	and put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the blood, and let such cauterizations that the sick person feels them in a certain way that the course of the corruption is taken away.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, as long as he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease which is called “corrodens”, and is nothing else than a festering of the member, for it eats away the members as fire dries up the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can be treated with fire, then heat the clavers small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing on all sides until it is completely healed, and nothing remains of it, so that whatever is corrupted is taken away by osmosis.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it rest for three days, and put on the cauterized places oil to soothe them, so that the burns of fire are healed, and all corruption is taken away.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of those born with a bent nose.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days a healthy child is not born, it is good; and if not, begin the cauterization on that which is delayed in its place rotten.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this ointment has never been cured with medicine from the fire in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said the cure for the medicine from the section on dislocation: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of radishes that come to the tips
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes, because of the weather, there is a disease that is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large, hairy thing that bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is such that you heat the cauterizer like a pen of a vault, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can poke the nail from all sides, and it has subtle edges; then you put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes out at the base; and let it sit like this for III days until it begins to move rust; then make a plaster of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and let the nails come out and will be rooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound by charring it until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the heart is turned away by defying, and many times avenges and hurts, so that it is necessary that you bring fire water cautery; and in this way: take a piece of iron or steel, or a pen of a vault, and put on the nail and the adder, that is to say, poke verrucae; and put the piece on it that it may burn all around, then put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water route deep until the root; and let the patient feel a little of the heat of the water for an hour; then let it be, and it will be rooted from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make another after this, as long as you take out all those who are in the heart, then cure the diseases that cause fever.
li cure dou trembler	He will cure the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold, or from quartan fever or other, it is necessary that you make them four or five fire-cauterions along the spine, one cauterization between each spine; and a cauterization at the feet, and one on the stomach with olive cauterizing powder; this will stop their shaking, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No one appears on the body by way of sweat, or pus-filled blisters, that come from rotten matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary for the first time that they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the blister: a thin fire-cauterizing twig of thyme, so that its tip burns in the fire, or a long root of aristea, or a cauterizing lens.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never do the cauterize from the beginning when it appears according to this manner, and they cannot grow hair before, but breaks off the surplus thereof, and are healed; but it is necessary that this should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery has been cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great changes in the blood of the artery that has been cut off at the wound, or incised on an abscess, or cauterized on the member, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop up.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And wherever it is necessary, when you have a second finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it so much that the blood stops from gushing out of your second finger, and no more drops are left; then take some olive oil, large or small, according to the size of the wound and its location, and put all of it on fire; then take II, or a great or a small one, according to the size of the wound and its place, and hold the hot oil over the vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the oil hot as long as the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you jump too much while he is holding your arm, and the cauterization is still hot, take another piece of the cautery that is in the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other as long as the blood has stopped flowing; and guard against burning the nerve that is delicate, and so that no other evil comes upon the sick person; and know that when the artery is cut short of the three [major] arteries, it cannot be stopped well even if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by firmly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop the flow of blood; and let it be bound and stretched firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a tight binding with cloth or place burning things on it, or similar things, if it does not help, then do not do it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Et si ce arrive à aucun qu'il n'ait mie mire ni medicine présent, si doit mettre son doi indice sur la plaie de la voinne si com nous avons dit, et bien énerger tant qu'il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer l'ou doit, mais l'ou moille d'awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for diseases and injuries.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first book all about diseases that require fire, or burning medicine, and the scoops and causes and instruments and forms of the cauterizations; and I have placed this chapter from the lower part of the head to the top, and I will go now in this chapter by this same path for those who suffer more easily than those who seek treatment.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, o dear one, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauterize, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not venture into folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the ways of people come to cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have so become ill with their disease that they die easily because of the confusion that arises from their illness, and from the great severity of their illness, then one must fear them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these I give you sense, and say: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is pitiable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you grant these who come to you who have this manner, but put more great kindness in your honor than in your covetise, and do not open foolishly but carefully from the one of whom you are certain, and of whom you could possibly take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health may be turned; and he who will help to have good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice, and may you will desire the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to that which is before or cautery of the caustic, that I have devised for you from the top as far as the foot, so that you can easily find that of which you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often occurs in children when the baby's cry is too loud and suddenly stops; and there is no reason for it to recover.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children; and of those that I have seen, many have died; and it seems to me that I should be more cautious in treating them.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with water, and the head of the child sank every day until it could not support itself; and the moisture was so great that he believed that he would die, and this moisture gathered around the bone on the side of the neck, between the collarbone and the bone; and the work is such that if you cut a large slit in the head with a knife, as far as we saw, until the moisture runs; and look at the shape of the spine:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is more moisture, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture is breaking the bone and you see the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand, and it does not close again: then you should make three incisions in the following manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head heal evenly, and give the patient dry meat to eat so that the member heals and is healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is, and where the angle of the aiguille [sic] is; for it is never before, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess opens, and the angle of the aiguille [sic], and make the incision according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and come away with blood, so that the patient dies from the pain of the blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	(regarding) the removal of the arrow, or of any other thing that is lodged in the flesh, and that causes pain;
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	(regarding) the removal of an arrow, or any other thing that is lodged in the flesh, and causes pain; When there is a disease called "cataract" (or) a pimple, and the illness is old, and medicine does not benefit, then the second cure is to make a cauterization with what you will cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Il covient donc, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d'un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l'une et de l'autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d'enche, puis cope l'une et l'autre d'un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc'a l'os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	It is necessary, then, when you cover the eyes, that the patient should put his hand behind his head; after he rubs the place with a hard cloth until the arteries appear, then pulls his neck forward completely; then look where the vein bites, and the lines of both sides are after the ears, and they have been folded; then sign the lines of the cheek, then cover both with a spatulum sharp on two sides, until the incision comes up to the bone, and this is done by the wide part of the head.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, if it bleeds constantly without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign off and cut to the bone; and that which is to be put out of blood should be six inches, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no pain, then draw the wound and bandage it, and the cure of the ointment as long as it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of grinding.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old grind comes, and catarrh is acquired, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old dry skin and similar things, and it is medicated by methods of medical treatment and all that does not benefit it, then we draw the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Et the manner of the extraction of them is that the patient makes a re-growth of the hairs on his temples, and hears the artery which opens in the temple, because she opens well by her beating, and is not little replied to the outside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is answered, then extract its neck from some sheets, then rub the place with no rough cloth, and raise the place of hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where there is this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And the manner of the extraction of them is that the patient makes a re-growth of the hairs on his temples, and hears the artery which opens in the temple, because she opens well by her beating, and is not little replied to the outside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is answered, then extract its neck from some sheets, then rub the place with no rough cloth, and raise the place of hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where there is this form: Then skin the leather lightly until you hear the artery, then twist it upwards like a pincher, and remove it well from the threads that are attached to each part; and if the artery is fine, turn it to the point of the awl, then cut off that part according to the quantity of II lines.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then neither is the sun a complete circle.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	If it is not cut, then neither is the sun a complete circle. And let the blood of the VI c/ be poured up to III; and if the artery is large, so that you bind it with two strong threads of silk, so that bleeding does not come forward because of the piercing of the wound, and runs away from the blood; then cut off the surplus that is between the II lines at that time in the middle, and then, if you see it, so cauterize it with the cautery knife up to the bone as soon as the head is cut; and this is the right operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to finish off moisture: for this is it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Ou il convenait pour l'extraction des artères que on emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les désliera, si soit curez de médicaments sèches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu'il soit sain; et se sans cort de l'artère tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautère, ou tu emploie lou leu de vitriole et l'estrain à ta main que li sans soit estáinchiez; et se tu n'as ceu présent, si met sor le leu ton doigt tant que li sans soit gelé, et arose le leu d'aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit extrait si com il convient; et ceu qui est muéde et plus léger en l'extraction de l'artère est que tu cautérises la veine de cet cautère tranchant de II pars, mais li tranchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two tools a space of one inch, and then when you have marked the ends of the two leans, and you pass your hot iron over it until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and be distant between the two shoulders because it is not souded by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come out of the veins that are on the forehead of the shoulder of force, and this medicine does not help at all, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and feel a movement as if it were cold; and since the hair is thin and moist so that the hairs fall off, and the hairs are burned by the heat of the tears, and are scarred by the fire of the tears, then it is necessary to do this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient "cure for bruises", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease, the hair that he has or front, then make III slashes or evenly along the length of the front; and one of the slits also as II two all in half the front by swallowing swallowed down to the tip, and the others II at II costels above the papers, and guard against the incision of the arteries that are at II costels above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II mandibles, and be each wound the quantity of III hands-wide joints; and have you arranged a piece of sponge and many drapes her to wipe the blood, then bottle the sputum got from both sides where this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	After the incision that should be made on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the curd that is between the II slits up to all the medicine that is on the bone, then do the same from the middle incision until the other second, and then remove this sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If one bottles in the first cut the instrument which is called "chertelle", and on both sides it is very well sharpened, and on one side it is soft, not sharpened at all, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the cutting edge toward the back of the car at the joint, and let the cutting edge be soft toward the bone, and bottle it until it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the top at the joint as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens from the knee, and then on the other side do in the middle cut up to the other end; and then remove the blood evenly, and express it out; and then put into each cut a tent of fine cotton cloth, and put drapes soaked in wine and oil and balm, and guard that the chaps' feet don't come; and on the third day unbind the bandage, and introduce great quantity of cold water, and then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures from which one treats wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Dou reume des eulz
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is a catarrh due to habit, and you see the hairs thin and small, and it weakens the sight, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and at times a painful discharge occurs, and the patient sneezes; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the medicine I have prescribed is effective if used.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to rub his forehead hard, then make a great cut at the hairline, and another across the wide part of the nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start with the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make an incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when you yawn; and when the bone is exposed, so dip all the blood in a sponge, and then tie cotton wool and linen around it; then lay bandages soaked in wine and oil on top of it, and be careful not to touch an abscess; when it has healed, so treat with drying things, which cause scabs.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take II parts of flour from wheat, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment thereof; and apply the same to these wounds in order to stop the flow of blood everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the pain in the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is found in ears is one of the four things: grain, beast, stone or similar thing such as iron; seed, such as peas and beans; flowing fluid such as water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is found in the ear stone or some other thing that does not fit into the ear, and does not enter the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then pour in a drop of violet oil or oil of sesame, and then instruct him to shake; and when the shaking comes, let it be stopped by putting strips of cloth or wool inside the ear; and raise the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth of times comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, he is made to extract with small pincers, from which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, it is good; if not, he is made to extract with small sharp tools; and if it does not come out by that means, take a piece of rawhide, bind it at the end of a stick or bar, and stop what is inside with wax so that the blood cannot enter with the rawhide; then let it go forward in the form which we have said, for mouth of times comes out in this way; and if it does not come out in some way, take a drop of juice, and put it on the joints, and fit them together; then press the juice on stone or something, and let it go forward.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she doesn't run away from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to split the ear in the same way as an abscess is cut out, and spasms; and the method of splitting is such that you first make the patient well by removing the blood from the head, and draw it out according to the measure of its virtue, and then place the patient between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and split a small split in the root of the ear into fat where it depends; and let the split be like the moon until you come to stone, then pull the bone according to your power, and suck it into your mouth; and cure as long as he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is stuck and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it can't come out, then administer the subtle tenve spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of this grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But don't do this yet when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract them gently and with care, as we have said, so that the extractions are gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, when it comes to the ear, it is necessary that the patient use a sneezes of the first conditions, and patch up the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful on that ear where the fluid is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it's frozen, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it's frozen, it's good. If not, take many pieces according to the length of your finger in turns and lightly, and heat them slightly by the fire; and put one or more of them into his ear, and sault them from the other side, and make another piece on the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease to make this piece of piece until all the fluid is gone, and so it is completely gone; and if you see it, take a bit, and bottle one of the ears, and the other with fire until the more bit is burned; then refai anotherbit of the other pieces until all the fluid is gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small horn, as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large horn so that it can be felt, then perform extraction with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help, then you should look at the ear towards the sun: if there are no worms, then extract them with subtle tweezers, and if there are none, take the hair by which it is attached.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert a small needle into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's pain, then suck out the content; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to let out, so stop up the tube of cotton as I said on the stone; and if they do not rise out strongly as we have said, so administer distillations that the old ones have tested in the lancing of worms, and you will find them or treating of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, whereby here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is of silver or of gold are ready to small holes, and above the worm for distillation; and to press inside the distillation into the instrument of brass very well made by this, and if you see take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube be in the ear; then bottle inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand temperately as long as the oil is distilled or chipping from the ear; and let the smell of the patient inside, and let the distillation I pot heated on the fire in this way that it is distilled in the ear; and keep it not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the bumping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who do not have any piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by bumping a wound, or a cart going inside the ear, and such a bump comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it; and it never happens that there is any defect in it, and one sees it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	This then is what comes completely into the ear sometimes, so that one cannot see it: it is a great remedy in many dispositions, and in this you must put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation appear, if the wound has completely cured all this sputum from which this form comes:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so that it does not bump the ear; if the operation is a wound or a cart in the ear, if he has subtle bruises, and he copes lightly, until this cart is completely ossified.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ear wart is completely removed from the ear, then take a very fine, light razor and heat it slightly, and then put the horn of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if you feel the wart that the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce it lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a small tent according to its width on the skin, and smear it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make sure that no day passes until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose oil and powder it with vitriolic broth; and if you see that the ear has escaped, cover it so that you pull out the tent and take another tent moisten in rosin oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other remedies that ease the pain of the headache, which are found or used to treat the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the cart of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take the hair of a person when it is moist and dry, so that you can spread it with nail and pin, and the comb of its roots; then put on top of it vitriolic broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if not scalded with the fire of the lenteous cautery, and the cautery is made after the incision is made; and many times repair, because nothing remains in place of their roots; and when they are scorched by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Several times come in papers hairs that seem gristle in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", and is a mixture of moist large in the paper on top; the work is such: take care if the grandine moves from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; stretch it out wide, then scorch each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the fracture is large, join it with a stitch, and heal until it is sound; and if it is small, do not use force, for the sutures will soon open again and cause great trouble.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the fracture is descending inward from the ear towards the top, turn the paper over, and fix it with pins on both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not harm the patient. And when the fracture is fixed, pour in salt water, and heal the place where it hurts until the patient is sound.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is a fat that is produced in paper towels above, and it happens more often to children, and hurts their eyes, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes; and so they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep on them, and their paper towels moisten their cheeks, which swell and change color due to the exinach that opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your two and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to do this is so that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent shaped like a circle according to the quantity of exit between each part, and then put it on him; and press with your hands from one side and the other, so that the exit is joined together in the middle of the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, making a slit no larger than the wound at the opening of the vein; and make the skin completely round until you reach the exit; and by several dispositions bring out the exit from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then an entire piece of linen cloth between your hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as much as it will stretch; and be careful not to disturb the slit, lest you bring all the fat out to the oil, lest you stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it escapes in the beginning of the split, so that it is slightly larger than necessary; then take out as we have said, and place it on the joint, and pull from the splint.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind seed and put on top to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the abscess being hot, so that the healer with ointments heals until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hairs come out before their time, and become dry, and cause eye problems, and bring about the manner of diseases as usual tears and softenings of the papers, until it is a cause of hair destruction; and the treatment is according to four ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine water according to what it is in front of, or by cauterizing paste, and it is done or by incision and sewing, or by cauterizing with a knife, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aiguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantitat que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et s'il y a un morceau qui doit être coupé, et qu'il y ait une quantité généreuse de papier moelleux; alors faites un trou dans tout le spatumile sur les deux lignes que vous avez marquées, et commencez à couper du grand liquide jusqu'à ce qu'il soit petit; et s'il y a une fente près des poils naturels d'une taille comme celle d'un radis, alors coupez l'ongle dans un des deux angles où il se trouve, puis grattez-le complètement; puis assemblez les deux lèvres avec une couture d'une aiguille à tout fil de laine fin, et essuyez le sang, et faites sortir la superfluité des fils sur les deux sorcillets à rien de collant, si vous voyez faire ceci; et si ce n'est pas le cas, alors ne faites pas attention, puis laissez la couture et les fils jusqu'à trois jours ou quatre; puis guérissez la plaie sans couture avec des choses sèches et contraignantes, car le papier se détache au toucher de la plaie et à sa combinaison, mais la couture est mouillée (comme diraient les anciens), et c'est un travail sans peur; et si d'une autre manière: il faut que vous signiez le papier avec une figure qui soit aussi grande que la feuille de mirte, comme nous l'avons conté, à trois oncines selon la forme qui est ici:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and cut off this which stands up little by little evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and that thing is not even, then take an awl or a needle with thread, and press it to the form; and bottle another thread of different length, and the other thread of less length, and join them evenly between your fingers; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin over which you have cut, as we have told you, then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with wax and similar salves; and never happens that the hair of the paper are turned: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitches in one and in the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it hesitates, if the joint is tight, then heal it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound has healed, and the paper is lifted, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute un fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l'un et l'autre subtilement, et soit la longueur des fils une palme de long; puis ordenez en la chasse l'autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noyez les chefs du fil; puis mettez le chef du patient dans votre sain; et soit delicat lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declariez, car c'est un ovrage subtil et menu, puis boute l'aguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajosteit, et la fai percer en la papiere hastement tant que vous la trayes desus le poil natureil; puis retirez le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s'il en a un ou deux ou trois ou plusors; puis retirez votre main tant que les poils viennent fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec le poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et s'il est chassé, il est traité et les poils ne viennent pas avec lui; si vous trainez la chasse au désordre sur toute la ligne que vous avez ordonnée, aussi longtemps que la chasse vient de dessous par la vision de l'huile ; alors, si vous trainez la chasse et la ligne, et versez l'huile et le laissez reposer II jours ou III, tant que les poils s'enracinent en leur lieu et que la chèvre naisse; et si les poils sont petits, alors accompagnez un petit poil long des chevelures naturelles, et soulevez-les avec celui que vous laissez, aussi longtemps qu'ils soient étirés et puis relâchez-les.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil decay
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil decay, comes in the oil, there are two ways it happens: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens because of sudden wound, or by surgery or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of working in that is that you open that wound and separate the lips from it, and put linen bandages inside, and leave it until it is healed; and it is not appropriate for you to use in its treatment things that dry up and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, then the disease will return worse than before; but it is appropriate to use softening things, such as fenugreek; and water or salt and linseed are boiled, and an oil is melted with hyssop and wrapped in a bandage, and treat that person.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you give yourself in guard that it does not mend according to its form before; and the practices that we have said are only useful if they are applied to this disease, so that it does not return according to its form before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the horse that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is called "axios," is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident arises from wounds and slits and cauterizations and similar things; and the way of its occurrence is that you hold an awl, so that it has two threads, and pierce it into the shoulder at the left side as far as the back, so that the thread goes into two shoulders; then place the char on top of the awl, and cover it with a large spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back according to what is appropriate, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts where it lies within the paper; and let the shoulders of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision that you have covered, and let one angle be such that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has non "I griesche"; then remove this char, according to the quantity that its edges are in need of an axacrati, from what precedes the paper, then join the two severed parts, and sew them with another thread; then let the cure be of those things that we have said regarding the mollifying medicines, and tenting, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et s'il est venu à la maladie par un coup ou une couture ou un cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fendure plate des cheveux des papilles, et selon ce qui est ci-devant ; puis desserre entre les deux levres d'une tente, si comme j'ai dit ; et il faut faire l'ovraige selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très différente en forme, et les saiges maîtres appareillent engien de tout leur pouvoir comment il fait revenir la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade aussi, selon ce qui lui convient d'ovkaige et d'instruments en plusieurs dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	The paper quickly
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Now quickly cut off the paper with a razor in such a way that it is cut with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural movements, then it is necessary, indeed, that you put the tip of a sharp scalpel at an angle above the paper, and leave it there; and stretch it with pincers, until you have cut what is above the subtle gum resin, which is neither too sharp nor too thin, so that the oil does not suffer from the too sharp gum, and your incision, from which you will peel off the joined paper, be light, so that the paper revives according to its natural shape; and all the joined part be well cured, and never use in the sharp salt water, and the soft water, and the linseed; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of flax, and put on the oil wet wool in plenty of urine; and after three days use the collyrium and the soothing things until it is well.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I understand that the nail has two appearances: one is nerve-like and resembles hard syrup, and the other is similar to frozen white moisture, which cannot be touched by iron or patted with a towel; both appearances begin to spread towards the great tear, and grow larger and larger until they obscure all vision, light, and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then he opens the nails; and take the paper into your hand, then coil the nail between small doubled fingers, and lift it up; then take an awl, and I put there a hair of horse, or cow, or ox, and thread it strongly; and double the point of the awl a little and stick it through the nail, and let the thread hang down from the fillet, and scrape off at the root of the nail all the skin and silk that is left, leaving only the thin layer of tears; so that by incision does not come the blood to the heart in the usual way; and never is the nail fixed but with both hands, and on a thread, as we have said; then scrape off all the small skin left hanging from the fillet.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l'incision giete en l'oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc'a l'autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu'il i covient tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And keep the spikelet from touching the raw flesh and breaking it open, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of seaweeds, and of the colander made of litargire, and leave it until the next day; then heal him as much as he can be healthy.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all and the time is pressing, then distil from your mouth in the oil of the colander made of litargire and of the red colander and seaweeds, and stop the oil until the next day; then start again with this same method, until it is all healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing else is contrary to you in oil, as an abscess would be, then milk it, and first treat the abscess until it is healthy again, then restart the process as before until it is healthy again.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the wound hurts in oil by much damage, then let it be suspended continuously, and cut off a part of it, not all of it, so that tears do not come out; then distil into oil a red color that is made of lime.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the plum pit
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of some men's hair that grows on the plum pit
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case it is necessary that you adjust the cure for each weak oil of nature; and of the accidental way, on account of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these workings until you see that the member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hair
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red that are covered on oil, and endure its work and weaken the oil every time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	is therefore necessary that you first examine what oil is, and if it is hard or soft, and there is no other disease in it than oil; then the coil in a certain way: instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then pause those veins entirely according to his wisdom, and let the oil be subtle twice according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And are two oils by degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and then with care remove the veins gently from the oil; and be careful not to bruise the oil on the tips of the spatulas, and do this work before noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not burn more than the veins; and when you have done this, if it is distilling in the oil a green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the sebaceous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have no power to coil all of it in that hour, then make an ointment on the oil of things that relieve the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and is assured of the abscess being hot, then start again according to this method which is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The fistula of the oil: if you treat it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut open the abscess, laying it bare, and drain all the moisture, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then re-set all the instruments, so that it may be made straight again; and make it sharp as a file, just as it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the bone's corrupted place, then turn it between your two hands, and press it with your hand a little while until you see that corruption is gone; and do this often, then restore the place of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the skin is tight and hard, and the bowstring remains fixed, and the neck of the arrow is also firmly fixed, and it has not been removed or opened, and no bad accidents occur, then this is good; but if not, there is another way to make the fistula open at the nose as follows: when you have uncovered the bone for a second time with iron and strong medicines, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron head has three angles and that the wood is flattened until it reaches the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If the skin is tight and hard, and the bowstring remains fixed, and the neck of the arrow is also firmly fixed, and it has not been removed or opened, and no bad accidents occur, then this is good; but if not, there is another way to make the fistula open at the nose as follows: when you have uncovered the bone for a second time with iron and strong medicines, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron head has three angles and that the wood is flattened until it reaches the top as you see here. Then place it on the delicate part of the nose, and keep your hand away from the oil pot, then continue to press all the way down until it breaks through the bone and causes the patient pain; and when the medicines have dried up, as I have taught you, and when the arrow is firmly embedded in the nose, this is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hair is completely removed from the whole head, and there is no chance of it growing back, or when it becomes thin, so that you need to use a bald patch; then put oil on the bald spot, made of resin and myrrh and incense and myrrh-scented resin, and then strain the oil, and plaster it with bandages and cloths; and the way the bandages are arranged is that you fold enough soft bandages, each one double, so that there are four layers; then put the unstrained oil on top of these bandages, and restart the process of straining; then remove the bandages and leave the oil strained for a day and night, and if it hardens slightly, you should strain it more often; then take off the bandages after a day and night, and if you see that the oil has returned to grow, it is good; if not, restart the process of plastering and bandaging and straining until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	dou derrompement de toil uvee
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	At dislocation in the woven cloth, then open, and comes thread-like particles as a grain of resin, and is predictable to see; therefore, if you cover it with a lid, the tensions are such that you push a needle into the root of the part below until it reaches the top, then push another needle where there is double thread from the part of the arm; and let the first needle be placed according to arrangement; then cover the double thread and tie one part of the cloth around it, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put wet oil on the other oil in abundance of ointment; and leave it until the thread rubs with the cloth, then cure the oil of soothing things as long as the wound heals; and never restrict the wound by tying each part of a circle of cloth, as long as it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have a good appearance, then pierce it with a thin needle that comes perfectly from the oil, and draw out the moist white scum and trim the hairs, and cut it short; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only a bow that is assembled in oil, resembling water coming down, and it is not water; and the way of its appearance in the work so that you sit the patient on II seats and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and let the bow come up to your hairs; then pull it off, and do not draw out and break the light, and see the hairs as they should be; and if it does not come out, know that it is water, and the way in which the bow comes up is as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are to treat the sick between your hands, then take the thin spatule and pass it over the cornea until the bow is laid down; and when it has come loose, pour into it a hot mixture of oil and honey, or if you like a hot mixture of fenugreek and honey, then let it be cured by another treatment until it is well.
des aigues de l’oil	with oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of needles in the incision, and that which is necessary to pierce; if in work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the sick between your hands, far from light because of the sun, and tighten the oil very tightly; then take the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument at the root of the cornea by the thickness of a ray in that clear part of the oil to the smaller lamina, and then bottle the instrument which is called "almagda" well, and turn your hand around so that it pierces into the clear part of the oil, and you will feel that almagda comes to the void; and it is necessary that the measurement of the path of almagda be exactly at the end of the space from the prunele up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the cornea, and then take the instrument up to the place where the water is, then express a path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is lying down now, then he will see the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a little while, and if he is to get up again, hold the instrument with force, and when it is well fixed and does not move, gently remove the marrow with your hand, turn your hand a little at a time; and then put a bit of milk in place of it, and lift it up from that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on the other side the oil where it is dry or wet in oil rosin and oil of plenty, and bind with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are our tenants, let us put on a good coat with a lot of rosin.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the marrow cannot enter the oil because it is too dry, for there are some people whose hairs are too dry, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprouve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faisses ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	As the abscesses open, you should pour oil in front of the seventh day, and address it with what soothes an abscess; and when it is calmed down, if it leaks, then cover it with a kerchief so as not to leak any day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and turn to these cases; and know that no physicians should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in our country there is a thing called almagre that sucks up water, but I have never seen it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in the books of the ancient ones; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the shapes of almagre, so that those who do not know them can see them; and let them be of metal properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this midmost subtility, and behind it three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the chair over the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times do various chairs arise or are born set up diverse, of which there is none who seem scorpions by the root of the feet; and if there be such or he had a chair enchantingly of good color, and if it be a chair of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that chair of those chairs which is enchantingly, and not enchanted, it is fit that you set the patient between your hands towards the sun; and operate his nostrils, and pour the liquid into those chairs, and wash them hard; because what you may sustain at the spatumile subtility from one side, so long as you know that this chair is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that can not be covered, if you open all the subtile light instruments legiterally, so that nothing remains; and if it does not take longer to rise, or an abscess, or a scar, as it should; and if it is malicious abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them as soon as possible until they are stained and all the chairs are bone, then cut or remove them easily and quickly or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If there is no pain, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is no space in the bone above, for the instrument does not come to cut: therefore you must put a piece of linen thread, not too thick, on his nose, with your fingers wrapped around each end with some space between them or less; and place the child's mouth around the thread at his power, and pull it in smelling until it comes out through his nose into his mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the tip that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other tip that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel each one after the other with your fingers wrapped around our hands where the thread is.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it as long as you know that the new wine has corrupted the must, then treat the grape, wash the blood, and moisten the grape with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the neck there right away; make it for III days or more, as long as the ointments corrode all who are delayed from drinking; and then put a plug of plaster in the neck some days while he is well, and if it has need of medicines dried, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines through the neck:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or of gold, resembling a lamp open, like a plug, and conduct it also; and if you see, make a closed plug, and be the instrument plain to purge the head; and I have many times at the head for him to keep it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the horse above the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times at the top of the neck there is a disease that is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large so that it can be seen with the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and burn the bone completely, then put fire on it; and if you delay to cover it up until it is large, if it is hard, of a pale color, poor sense: but do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when it is covered there comes great evil to the patient; and the abscess is touched gently, not with a pale color, and you see that it can be completely covered, if the patient is empty and covers it without fear, and treats the top with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the baby is born, cut and clean
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Understand that when there is a rupture in one of these joints that has been inflamed, it does little good, except for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when there is a rupture in one of these joints that has been inflamed, it does little good, except for some men. It is necessary, therefore, to cut and clean [the joint], and to look at the wound; then, with two sharp blades, join them together again, and then bandage it well so that it heals; and if the blades are severed on one side or the other, you must peel all the parts of the flesh until they heal, and then join the two blades again, and bind them up, and dust the powder with dragon's blood, and burn incense over it. And put a piece of plaster made from strong blood or another plaster that is available, and leave it in place until it drops by itself; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to stitch a wound so that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, with your hands, inside the lips, there are hard lumps like grain, small and large ones; therefore, it is necessary to turn the lips, and cut each one individually, and tie them tightly and cut them into parts; then employ the vinegar of vitriol, keeping it in place until the sores are healed; and then let it be dried out, and cure the area with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the tooth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there is a sore on the gums that the old man calls "albulus"; if it is necessary to hold it with pliers and cut it at its root, and let the blood run; then apply vinegar of vitriol or other drying and binding powders; and if this sore returns after the incision, and many times it happens, cut it again and cauterize it: if it does not return again after the cauterization, and these are the forms of the instruments to plug.
des sordens	of the orders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Of the orders: No order should be placed in the mouth between the teeth, those that are ugly and rough; and no order should the tooth be black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is stinking; so it is necessary that you place the sick between your hands, and his roots are under your hand, and pull out the teeth where they appear, without any delay; and in this way do white and yellow, and black and other colors, until they are all gone; and if one of them is at the first rasion, it is good; if not, then begin again on the second day and third, until you have all pulled out; and know that the teeth need different forms of instruments to be pulled out, according to what the work demonstrates, because the puller who pulls out the teeth with others has shapes different from those who pulls between the teeth; and these shapes should be ready for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that you treat the toothache as quickly as possible, because there must be no excuse for not doing so; indeed, it is a substance that must be extracted immediately.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	And then, when the patient is in pain, you must be certain about the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient, and he believes that it is in a healthy tooth, and has it extracted; nevertheless, the pain remains for this reason, as we have already seen with these gentlemen; and when you are certain about the toothache, you must scrape the tooth under the tooth with a sharp instrument so that the gum is completely removed from all sides; then, you place it in your hands or small pliers at one point and another, until it is well loosened, then you tighten the pliers; and let the jaw of the patient be firmly between your knees, and keep it still.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not fall, take any of these instruments and put it inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is stuck and won't come out, then you must fill it with threads where it gets stuck; and if it is pulled carefully with pliers, so that it doesn't break while being pulled; and you must cut the gum very cleanly around the tooth to pull it out.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you must take care that you don't break it, and if some of it remains, and returns to the patient with greater pain from the root than from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you must take care that you don't do like that ignorant surgeon who, because of his haste and arrogance, breaks the jaw many times, and doesn't know what we have told; but rather brings about by the question of that great disease for the roots that they delay, or for the jaw that they break, as we often wanted; and when the tooth is pulled, if you wash the hole with wine or hydromel or salt; and they run away without stopping, so often happens, put the hole with vitriol broth; and if this doesn't work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, so that the first tooth does not mute, are to be long and thick in diameter, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of thick members so that they do not bend when you pull it, and let them be made of good iron, and let them be sharpened to keep them in place.
de la racine des dens	the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root moves when pulled, then you must place cotton wet with oil on the place or with butter for one day.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the roots are smooth, for then the pliers that are called 'algefri' do not hurt the head; and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, then you must take off the charm entirely around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'althali', that is to say a file, and this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be it flat and thick so that he does not break, and the root jumps from this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the tools, from which the shapes come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has II rain, so that here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front in the rasion of the teeth, and this instrument which seems a pair of pliers, whose form is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be so that he cannot break it, and know that many tools of teeth are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the master wise men themselves try out their tools according to what their work and the disease show them, because there are many diseases where the old do not teach tools for the diversity of them; and if he does not break the cart or other bones, on which it will lie, if you look for the tools that suit it, which I have told you, and help with gestures, so that here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return it to its place with suitable medicines for this person, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then remove all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not fit well according to the natural shape of the jaw, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, you must know that the root is not in its place, and it cannot be sewn or filed; then file it; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and which is made of iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits and tightens day by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a file such as this is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the lode where we make needles; and in one's hand, little by little, lightly, so that it does not move until it chimes; then, at the end, completely shaves off any razor, and its edge is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen...
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth loosen, whether by pounding or chewing, and the patient cannot press upon what he chews so that he does not chime, and you have treated them with restringent medicines, then it is necessary to restrain them with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and pusy, but the gold thread never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you notice any gaps, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then insert the nails between the teeth, one or more, as far as you can cleanly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start again at the part where you started, and gently and carefully tighten your hand until it no longer moves; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then attach the head of the shoulder to a pair of pliers, and join them together, and place them between the healthy tooth and fasten them so that they do not injure the tongue; and then leave them in this tight position as long as it can be held, and if they slip, or the threads come loose, hold them together with another thread, if it does not break; it will last all its time, and this is the shape of the jaw and the form of the attachment of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then, if the tooth has fallen out, replace it in its place, little by little, as we have said; and let no one touch it who is not skilled and patient, and never make the shape of a tooth out of ivory, and put it back in its place where it has fallen out, and hold it fast as we have said, and let it remain in this tight position for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the liens of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is lost the lines of the tongue or nature, which are not as such; or by accident of a sore swelling; and the ovraiges are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your lap, and let go of the tongue; then copper the nerves of the lip, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or not, and it is by a sudden sore, then bite with your knife and copper the lip wide; and guard that the cut is not too perfect, for the artery that is in; and when you have done this, then lift up the water of rose and thus, or cold water, then put on the tongue a piece of linen; and dip it each night, so that the leech does not stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood rushes out, then sprinkle vinegar on top; and if it does not go away, then cauterize it with the slow cautery, which is good for that; then treat it with other treatments until it is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a red or black or hard color there, then the patient should not feel it, then do not touch it, for that is a ulcer; and if it declines towards blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour the vinegar on it, and make it with a thin blade, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it rushes out to your ovraige, then sprinkle vinegar on top until it is yellowed, then return to your ovraige as you pull all of it; then remove its head thus and that rope, and treat it with other treatments until it is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No voice comes from inside the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "amandres", and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, take care: if it is an abscess of small size and light color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron either for fear of causing pain; but let it be as long as it is still alive, and then take it off, or else it will burst itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, you should prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see whether the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the sick person in front of the sun, and let his shoulders be well heated, and he opens his mouth and puts his tongue between his hands, and presses the instrument against it, from which comes the form; and let it be made of silver or gold as thin as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And when you have pressed the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the scalpel and put it in amber, and carry it higher than you can; and do not bring anything with it, except for the handle of the instrument, from which comes the shape, which seems a few pieces; and yet their heads are coroved and they are one above another, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or an iron bar.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you hold it with pliers, from which comes the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be it cut on one side and not on the other; and when you have chopped one of the ambers, then chop the other according to the same way, and after the incision gargarise the patient with hot water, and very easily, and if the blood comes out, gargarise the patient with wine or cooked pomegranates or leaves of mirth, and similar things, until the wound is healed; and never let other abscesses appear in the throat than the two ambers, if they are cut in the same way as the two ambers.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was growing inside her throat, which is to say a small-sized abscess; and I had it well sealed up all around so that the woman could not breathe through the opening that had been stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had delayed even one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had been there for two rain cycles through the two openings where the nails are.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then, and inserted an osprey into one of the two openings where the nails are, then went inside, and there I found a large portion of the bowels; then I refilled it in the other opening where the nails are, and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I inserted the osprey into the abscesses, and poured some of the contents out, and at that moment the opening in her throat began to open again, and she started to drink clear water and then wine, and didn't stop cutting off part of the abscess by long stretches; and the abscess receded again, and filled up the space that I had emptied out, until it grew very large; then I sewed it up and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stayed stopped up; and I left those parts behind, and only God knows what happened to them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the wound comes from the eye, and it is deep and far away, it is called "transverse"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eyelid".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the wound does not benefit from the treatment, and you see that the lower lid is calm and thin, then you should chop it off; and if it is round and assembled and not too far away; and it is bloody or of a dark color or black, then you must avoid the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the lazy eye.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have said, of its blueness and remoteness, let the patient sit in front of the sun, and press its tongue onto the instrument of which we have spoken above; then cut off the corner with a sharp knife, and take out the bullet with two tools that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; because if you cover more, it will grieve the voice and the word; and after the incision, use of what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use fire cautery on him.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then he presses the tongue of the instrument which we have said or fire cautery, and grinds with sharp water so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and by the employment of this tool's shape, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the head have a hair where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and put the instrument which we have said or fire cautery on all the medicine on the nose; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he salivate and the water runs from his mouth into the medicine, if not going down his throat, and let him burn; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the nose, the quantity of half a hour, until you see it get dark and the medicine's bites are gone; and if you need to recommence the fire cautery, do so, and after the cautery rinse it with cold water, and clean what is around with a cotton bud dipped in the medicine; and let it be arised with cold water, and cure by gargling until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, except for the cauterization. If it is cured with this method of fumigation, take a plant and aniseed and oregano and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in a pot, and pour it easily and boil it; and the pot should be very tightly covered with strong earth, and place the instrument over it according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be of silver or gold, and let one of the bottles be put in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises through the canal to the eye until the eye is dead; then begin again often, until the eye dries out, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess, for many things have happened; and do not do this except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog's tooth and put it in the patient's mouth so that his mouth does not become too hot; for the dog's tooth does not produce too much vapour in the mouth, and this is good treatment together with healing salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often there is an aeration in the throat of fish or nothing; so that you must take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see movement in the thing; and if it does not open by itself and is put back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will be ejected by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and you tie the sponge to it, and then swallow it; and when it arrives at the place, if it moves, and then pull hard; and if it does not come out by that which we have said, then take an instrument of plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.
de la sansue de la gorge	Et soit l'instrument courbé à la tête de manière qu'il puisse entrer plus facilement dans la gorge, et que la tête soit levée en haut; et garde que tu ne touches pas à l'épiglotte, que les sons ne lui viennent pas, ni ne poussez pas l'os à l'intérieur; et vaut mieux que le patient boive l'instrument, pour que s'il avale, il avale tout l'instrument en même temps.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	De la sansue de la gorge,
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the pus, if it is all small nails, or tiny claws that reach this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if he doesn't deserve it, take a dog's tooth, and pour it down the throat of the patient, then pour or twist the tooth with fire, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is infected with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full jar of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in to swallow, and move it with his hand often; and if soon as the pus feels the water, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't spit as we have said, then inhale the patient with assafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the incense burning process; do this many times, for it will not be able to hold back.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d'un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l'estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n'en isse mie, mais viegne jusc'a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s'elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d'aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu'elle isse fuer par cest governement.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument is such that one can treat the tongue, if one can see it, as resembling pliers twisted to enter the mouth; and it has a shape like a scalpel, and it has sharpness from lime, so that whatever it takes hold of, it does not let go; and thus is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the capitis of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The heads of abscesses are, according to this memory which comes here from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in incision; and it is in two ways, of which one is in its middle semblance, and of that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the head of the abscess is different from that of the foundation, and the appendix at the root is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, until the bow is dead according to its achievement; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crusted, and do not die according to their achievement, as in the case of an abscess that is in a delicate joint.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from the joints, and leave them as they are, in case the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is a cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is from the main limb, and you delay perforation as long as it is dead, so it will harm the main limb; or if it is from the foundation, then let it be pierced in such a way that it does not come to complete digestion, lest that which is from the foundation rot completely and be poked out from within, and a fistula come; and cannot heal in great terms.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time for perforating the abscess which is dead according to complete digestion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the stabbing of the top of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it is most dependent on the abscess, and there where it opens; and let the perforation be made from the long of the neck, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all of them equally where it is not blistered.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where they bleed, according to which limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the middle, so that it is necessary to leave the piercing until it has been completed in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, if you keep the body extended in its flow from it, and is full of dirty water; and by chance harden the lips and the depth of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to which limbs they need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many splits according to the appearance of their size; and if there are such abscesses where they need to be chewed, and covered up; when they have become as tough as cloth, and are softened, it is done as with blisters: and if there are any that are split into three angles, and if there are any that are covered like a apple, as with abscesses of the ankles; and if there are any that are cut in a circle, and other sizes and a covering shape.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechef; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the hopes may jump sometimes with the release of the bow, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this ointment with great care, and when you have pricked your abscess, if the wound is small, then bandage it with linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there are many pus-filled cavities, then put a patch on each one so that they touch each other; and if you have torn some of the skin around the abscess, then sew it up; and if you have stuffed some of the skin with wet hair, then pack it tightly with dry cotton or linen rag until the next day; then wash it, and treat it with ointment until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is an escape of blood from the cut, then bring cold water and wet the fabric, and put it on the place that is bleeding, again and again.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the escape of blood persists, then bring government and cure, and the powders that I said to put in the ears in this book, and if it is an ear, and the ear is nervous, let you know that you put on your clothes and drapes wet with wine and oil warm; and if it is in the ear, and the ear is fleshy, then let you know that you soak your drapes in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil for three days, as we have said; and then wash the abscess and dry and cure, as it should be, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally for the treatment of abscesses; or I told you how one should go before the treatment of abscesses, and see this paste.
des soros	wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When the head begins to give small abscesses, and is handled by us so that it is in a mess, as much like a glove as a shoulder joint, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and those where there is moisture as well, and if they are hard and bony at the base, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose itself.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you experience with every instrument called "trimmer", from which the shape comes next, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if the wind blows from above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, if it does not leave the hair that contains this moisture, because it returns to its place when left nothing; then dip in cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; otherwise, in water and vinegar, and employ the wound, and leave it until another day; and heal those who are delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the cotton has finished, on the second day, and the tar, as long as you know that it does not stay overnight; then heal the wound with ointment suitable for the case, until he is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, if the wound is in this form, let it go; and pour your oil, and peel all over, and apply all your cure to draw out the puss or where it lies; and if the artery makes you contrary, do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And so do with the abscess if it is painful, and with the tailor and with the healer as I have said to you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the painful abscess and on the moist one, if it is lighter, because they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or chief place have no moisture, and of these two abscesses that I struck the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as a heavy stone, sharp and white, and could not break it; and if any of them had been hit, it would also have caused a wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come from the head, it is necessary that those who come from the children and the roots of the ears should be completely opened, so that the bow can come out; and heal them as they should.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Several times has there been an abscess in the throat, and it has gone to the ears, and to the neck, and never comes to another place or to the chest, and is swollen, and are infected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every scrofula is properly inside its rib, as the neck and the abscess at the throat, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulae are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are those that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in those that one can see of good disposition in the neck, and is similar to the color of the flesh, and does not move from any part and is not deep; so that you must cut it from above, and scorch each part, and the two lips of the mouth are together at one end if you need it, as we have said in regard to the abscesses in the throat; and scrape little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and is not too deep either, lest the hand escape, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut something that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it will not let you sew, then put vitriolic acid on it, or some powder that stops the bleeding, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has calmed, if you return to your work, as long as you do it; then feel with your index finger whether there are any small sores, if they are, pick them and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if it has a big vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not right that you should cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang down without hurting; then wrap the wound in old linen dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cover all the scar, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them up; then there should be no delay because of the abundance of the scar.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you hear to cover the root of it, and draw forth firmly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scars that have excess fluid, cut them so they die; and cut them as we have said before, depending on them, then arrange tendrily and carefully, so that it does not corrode those who are delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well washed, cure with ointment, careful to cover it.
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old said and spoke about the stretching of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is the scriptural word of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	A those who have squint, it is fitting that the flap of the throat which is called the "epiglottis" be removed; and one shall not seek aid from this, since all the veins and the palatine bone of the sick person are to those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the two Mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the palatine bone, it is fitting to cover the epiglottis so that the strangulation which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it with III circles or IV a small incision from the top, between II circles or by the quantity of the incision in the throat, not in the cartilage; and this is suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis so that there is no blade, and the vessel is long to prevent it from breaking.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, so that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, then he splits the larynx as far as it comes to the voice box; and avoid the blood vessels from blood, if you see nothing, and then apply the medicine to it, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the fluid of the voice box that goes out by the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice. And leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed when one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound, and the cut all under the cartilage; then administer the medicines that cause blood to flow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuca says that we should not do this as long as the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the default leaves him.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then take care of the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and thus is protected from death; and to order the elder to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he ordered to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young woman take a knife and put it in her throat, and cut some of the glands in her throat; and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if she were dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had come from it, and I saw that she had not cut a vein but only her throat, and her veins were flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it as long as it was well; and there came to the maiden nothing but that she grew red in the face, and returned to her normal state; so I said to myself that, in the surgery of the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernia of the throat is called "gastric hernia," and it is a large hernia of a yellow color, most common in women; there are two types: congenital and acquired; there is no cause for congenital hernia.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to two ways, so that one is similar to fatty tissue, and the other way is similar to an abscess which comes from us through the arteries; and there is fear, and he cannot do anything but cut it off entirely, if it is large, as we cut off fat, and examine and search all the internal organs: if you find it like this too, as I found some, and there is none at all, then cut it off, and take care well, and treat it so that it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to describe ourselves, which I will now explain in full; and it is important that we understand the clear distinction between our nature and that of an alien.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and chills are due to the rising of the blood heat, which is complete when the perspiration is accomplished; then rest the fever and the chill.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is no fever or chill or pain, and it begins to sweat, which is according to the color of the blood, and it also starts like a bud and becomes fat; and it is according to its appearances, whether thin, or wet, and its color is very different from that of the alien, as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the patient's illness, you must first test and question all the instruments called 'manipulators', according to their form or paste that is applied afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for the incision of an abscess is that you squeeze out or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers slowly and slowly, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the intruder, and take care not to go too far.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if the running water is current, that it be colored, so that you do the same with the others as I have said about the abscesses; and if after the intruder does not run moisture, know that it is greasy, then you do it in a cross shape, and take it with pliers, and scrape it lightly from each side and watch the spot where it lies so that you bring it out healthy with the knot; and if you cannot bring it out healthy, then take it piece by piece so that nothing remains stationary.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d'aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d'autres cures tant qu'il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If it does not stay in place, it returns to us many times; and if it stays for a little while and does not cause you any pain, then employ some corrosive powder on the wound, extract it, and apply warm oil of chamomile, and cure it with other treatments until it heals; and if we are very ill, then cut off the two lips of the wound, and cure it from char.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s'en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez "albaret", et I qui est apelez "breb", et s'en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aiguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d'arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d'argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantitat
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of three manners: large and small and tiny; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they are also like the needles from which sorcerers cut, and they are of yellow brass, or of iron, or of silver, and move those that are yellow, and are more proven by black plunk to enclose fistula corbeaux; and they are of three manners: large, medium and small, according to the width of the fissures.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grand, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n'en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, bras, mamelles, angres, et semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	The chief of these things that are done are sharp, and some of them do not cut more than one side, from which the skin is peeled so that the vein or nerve is not hurt; and these intrusions have many kinds of responses, so that the patient does not lose his mind through the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three sizes: large, small, and medium, as you see; and we only use them in the middle part, like legs, arms, breasts, elbows, and similar things; and we never make any other instrument small, resembling skin plasters, according to this form, so that we stop the blood:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to rot, as long as they look like women's breasts; and they become ugly and swollen, and if anyone is going to treat them, it should be done according to this form from line b.g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	None of the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to rot, as long as they look like women's breasts; and they become ugly and swollen, and if anyone is going to treat them, it should be done according to this form from line b.g. until the g.: then peel off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound by immersing it, then join together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the decay of blood, then you should fill the wound with damp cotton wadding soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it drains the remaining blood and fat, then cure it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the tendons of the heel
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	are handled with care, and if there is only moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels which are in the abscess are empty, then employ cotton wool to plug the hole, and leave it there for a day, then remove all the wool, and treat with ointment until healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scar, then cut it as we have said in cutting scars, and if the wound contains bowels, then apply fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is tight above it, then often an abscess forms, and all of it runs into the opened vein and an abscess; and if you recognize it for an artery, then the abscess is long and even; and when you feel it with your two hands, you feel a movement; and when it is for a vein, then you feel a release apparently; and it is foolish to plug this abscess, and terribly so when it is dislocated in the tendons, and at the ankles, and in many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is fitting that the treatment of iron be avoided, and that the one who is chief also be avoided, and in that which swells up from an artery cut from above the skin; then work on the abdomen as a snake, and carefully separate the artery from the threads, as long as it remains uncovered; then insert an awl, and let it pierce all the way to the other side of the rib cage, and take the artery with two threads; according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then press down the place where there is tension between the two ties of a thread as long as what is between them comes out; then cut off the aposteme; then bring the treatment that has been prepared in advance, as long as the tie chokes; then treat that which is coming from the ointing, as long as it is healthy; and if the aposteme is to be taken away, so that you hold what remains with your hand, then take the awl and insert it into the place where you are holding it in your hand, and let it pierce, and there are two threads; so that you pull it from the other side of the rib cage; then tie the aposteme together, as I have told you, or tie one of the two parts to the two ties of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread will not come out, then insert another awl into all of the thread that is above the skin, and take the threads in four places; then cut off the aposteme until the superfluity comes out, then cut off the superfluity from the cure and leave what remains tied; then put it on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, and bring cures for tentances and ointments as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when they come from the artery and the vein, they come from the nerves when they are wounded, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and they are aching, and do not seem to be of one color, but have many colors, and feel pain when they are stretched, and do not move forward or backward or to the sides, and they do not bend easily, and they do not go well with iron: perhaps there is a contraction; and that which is at the head or at the forehead, it feels the skin to the scalpel.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the aposteme is small, if it has a nail, and kopes in its root; and if it is large, if it hangs on an onion, and scorches it, then the bone and the wound are sewn together, and it is cured until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	The big bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Big bellies hanging down; once there was none in the wombs and nowhere else did it appear, and this disease is called "mould" because of its resemblance to mould; and the root is subtle, and the head is large; and I have seen one man who had two big bellies that were more like mould than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were swollen, and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found one to be XVIII ounces in weight, and the other VI З.; when I incised them so that you can see, the patient is moist, and the color of the artichoke is white and moist, with a subtle root; if it is chopped with a large spoon, let it be cauterized by fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaideespoanteit et paourous de l'incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l'artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d'estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu'il cope l'artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pois bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu'il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound is well
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the wound comes by fire or by cutting of a sore, and it is on the belly and there are some boils, so as it happens in other wounds, or of blood which stops from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind; and if it is by the cutting of the sore and by the issue of the boil, so is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then there is more diversity, and when one presses it to its two sides so that it returns, and then comes back again, and perhaps it is seized, and increases much at the entrance of the bath and by great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et s'il est à cause d'humidité, c'est une chose légère, et il faut l'ouvrir bien quand tu le presses à ta main, ne le contrains pas; et s'il est à cause de sang, si ouvre-le par ces signes l'apothème gros et dur, et il est placé selon une quantité; et s'il est à cause d'un vent, s'il est sec au toucher, et l'ouverture si c'est que tu regardes que son apparence est pour le sang de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou du vent.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If so for moisture, it is a light thing, and it must be opened well when you press it to your hand, do not restrain it; and if it is because of blood, if open it by these signs the big and hard apothecary, and it is placed according to a quantity; and if it is because of wind, if it is dry to the touch, and the opening so that you look that its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or of the wind. If so, that you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in it there is doubt and fear, as I have told you or chapter of apothecaries, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dye his hair, and let it hang down straight, then sign all around the bowel; then order him to sweat gently between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed all of the spatumile, then put half of the appendix above all of the large hook; then tie it with a strong thread, or a cord of good silk tightly, and make it fast; then work half of the appendix stretched out on the string, and put your thumb index there, and feel the intestine; if you find it caught on the string, let go, and push the intestine towards the end of the belly; and if you find the bowel, take it with the hook, and cut off its excess; and if the artery makes you opposite or against the vein, so go loudly around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have made a cross to pierce; then pull the appendix in four directions above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place hanging until it rotten and die of itself; or cut it when it is thin and rotten, then cure what needs to be cured, and cut the appendix as we have said; and take out the blood or the moisture that you find, then cure the place where it is necessary, and solder the place.
dou chancre	Dou chanco
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Now we have spoken in the division of the appearance of cancer, and how it must act by medicines, and how one must abstain from the cure of iron; and we say that cancer develops in the breast, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the old man said that when cancer is in a place where it can be removed as cancer is in breasts, and in milk, and in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is developing; and when it is large and old, it is not right to approach it, for I have never healed anyone of it; nor has anyone ever healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the opening, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you never purge the evil of black bile; then make the patient well if he has manifest fullness, then afainst the evil put him in good position for the opening; then pour your oncines or cancer, and his hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving any; and let the blood run freely, and press hard at the place with your hand or with anything, and if the bad blood runs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bad blood is dried up; then cure him with other cures until he is well.
de ydropisie	of drooping
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	of drooping
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be trenching from both sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be trenching from both sides. A point, and in no way should it be so deep that it reaches the intestine when it is inserted, and cannot be wounded; then observe where the dropsy is running towards the intestines: If you need to insert it on the right side of the belly button III degrees directly above the navel; and if it is due to liver disease, place the incision on the left side of the belly button III degrees; and if it is due to bile, place it on the right side, and it is necessary that the patient lie down on the incision so that the excess does not run into the weak liver; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and empty it out, and hold your hand over all the sperm between the skin and the syringe also as when peeling off a quantity of an inch or more in thickness; then pierce the syringe until the sperm comes out at the level of the liquid, and this is the vein of the water, then draw it up, and pour out this instrument, from which the form emerges:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a silver tooth, and is of light gold or heavier copper, and has in the part of the heart one small hole; and it is made from one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut off so as to be like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feather into:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And the handle of the tool is at the top, so that when the tool comes to the water, it should be poured now on the tool; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than this at that hour, perhaps the patient will die because of the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he will turn his face down, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient and his pulse mean; then hold the tool and hold back the water, and it is held now by the key that stops the hole that is on the drug, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this way; then begin again the tool another day, if you see the patient suffering, and hold back a little water; do not make any noise until he does not delay but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient, and you leave him with much water, so that the cure of the grave or sand is hot, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and turns black from drinking; and the cure of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without a foreskin, or if the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it happens that he does not pierce all the delicate skin according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put the foreskin of the boy in a string, and tie it and hold it like this for III days or IIII, and when he urinates, if it is tight, make him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps you will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave his closed [foreskin].
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The wound is painful, if it is medicated with a strong solution, as we have said, if it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hernia in its natural place are blighted, for there is no one who has a hernia at the base of the penis, so that he cannot urinate unless he raises his penis; and he cannot ejaculate because the material does not reach the scrotum, and this is an evil disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedure for this hernia is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are brought forward as much as the size of a hen's feather; so that if the hernia pops out in the middle, as it often does, and if it comes out, let the person who comes out stop the flow of blood, and cure the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis blisters
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times there is a painful swelling in the penis, and it looks like a hideous scar; and some are benign and others malign. So you should squeeze them with gentle pressure, and cut and remove all of them, then put cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat with a fine ointment until they heal.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the swelling is malignant, of a putrid color and pus-filled, then you should apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it off, and if some of the swelling is inside the skin and some outside, then you should first remove what is inside; and when it has dried up, then remove what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the skin of the penis is not completely closed, then black and corruption come to its member and to the scrotum; so you should cut off everything that is black and corrupted, then put on plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from pomegranate peel and dates, and treat with other remedies until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when the pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery in this way: This is how to treat the release of blood and corruption; and if the foreskin is corrupted and withdrawn, so that you take a rope of pluck and urinate on the patient; and when the hair has grown on the head of the penis, which has happened because of an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary that you scald with the scalpel until the ties are loosened and the foreskin is completely freed; and if this is a difficult thing to say, then scald with a sharp instrument at the base of the penis and the skin; then separate them well and put a thin linen cloth wetted with cold water so that it does not re-burn.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a difficult operation if we do it the same way as the other wounds; but since we do this operation to children, it is necessary that we do it well and lightly, for the sake of salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not speak about circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law; and we have only this from experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For many of the greatest doctors and scholars who performed circumcision between the two walls, and with force, and all new wonder; so it was done that he who did it first cut off the foreskin, and by chance if one cut off the skin above, he would stop it.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it comes off again, and the pain is doubled, and there is no assurance that the point of the member is clean; and by chance the nail does not come off, and repairs the work, and often grows again so that there is no need for cleaning, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mouthwashing that is done to all the ligature of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut precisely as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if you cut it equally around the string all together; but that the thread be well twisted around the leather; and that the method of the first work should be so that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not force the thread to twist around the shaft so much, and then let it rest in all the ways that you can; then let it lie between your hands all straight, and return the forces between your hands or your fingers that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then bottle your hand on the shaft and blow or curl, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the shaft is there; then mouthwash it well with the dirt that is gathered, then tie the knot with a double thread, then lie it together I to I link; and hold it in place with II to II string, and cover it with II string, then let the water run over it gently and turn the head of the shaft; then let the blood run a little and a little, for that is the bleeding; and put powder on and on the powder I wrap a glove twisted with a loaf of baked egg yolk, confit with good oil of roses and fresh, and leave it there until another day, and the cure of other cures as long as he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the muscles for cleaning if this is so: the two shoulders should be soft and smooth, and the shoulders should also be long and even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleaning if this is when the curl goes out at the incision; so it is necessary that you extend it to your thumb, so that the lees make an abcess; and make it even, and if you cannot hold it in your hand, put it in a claw, and then make it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it is three days, and what is at the root of the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the boils are dry, and the skin is lightly burned; if you can move it as you please, and keep away from the part of the penis, this will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the dry things of the powder, which we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you take too much, and it goes up to the top, this will not harm you; treat it therefore, as we have said, as long as it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	To hold back urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	To hold back urine Such retention is due to stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, orbowel, or carriage, or similar things which we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow, and you see the retention for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be made to lie on his stomach; and let him stretch his legs over the back, and extend his abdomen from above the back, and restrain the patient so that he lies as well as he can; and then hold the bladder at the neck for the stone above, so that the urine flows; and if it does not flow, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you bring extraction with all the instrument which is called a "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be of fine silver, light as a bird's feather; and let the tube be about a palm long and half as thick, and make it very fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the top with wool or cotton, and bottle the top of the thread into the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and bottle it up to the top of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and lard, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; then lightly insert the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then twist the penis over the bottle; then bottle the syringe before the bladder, and let the urine come out to the empty thing, and that is not done according to this order but that for which you conduct him or she goes there twisted; then are the thread to all the tied wool and wol, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and make the urine run; and begin again the syringe until the bladder is empty, and make the patient well.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the bladder is affected by scurvy or sores, and you see that it has become sticky, then you should distil water and medicine there, if possible with the clepsydra instrument, which takes this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it is of three parts: one from one side and the other from the other, as you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine pours so that it stops well in the midsection without addition, if it can be drawn out with moisture, and throw when it is necessary; and when you see to move your medicines into the bladder, put the chief of the knife in the moisture, and draw as you go; if you draw the moisture with the blade, then quickly put the blade back; if it will enter the moisture and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clystera with which the bladder is Clystrated: namely, it is
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz à I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistur dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d'un boin fil double, et chaufe i poc celle moistur sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistur avenment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistur est jaivée a la vessie; et se tu n'as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai i cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute i fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble i dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d'oile et de moistur et d'aigue, et le lie en l'estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistur veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the ways of stone and the extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between the stone in the kidney and all the signs, and that a stone should be made of a size; and concerning the bladder and the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often comes about more with children and this is a sign that the liquid is salt to its substance; and I open it, and I rub the patient's penis, and I twist it many times, and then it is irritated; and most of these twists come out from the base; and the cure is lighter in children until they are four years old, and it is much heavier in elderly people, and the treatment is more light with those who have large stones than with those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the debris that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he is not encumbered at any time with trying to find a stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and move them up towards the genitals, so that the stone comes out whole from the bladder, and never goes up into the loins; then make him sit with his hands between his legs, and his feet raised; then feel inside to find the stone; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry to cut it off from above.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If it does not come out when you touch all over, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old and complete, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and incomplete; and put it in its fundament, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your second finger, press at the col of the bladder; then press upwards with your second finger, and bottle it out towards the opening where you can cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extends with his right hand the sacs above, and with his left hand holds the skin which is in front of the sacs on the part where the waist is done; then I pour the spatumil, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And open between the sacs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left navel; and let it be right up on the stone, and your two sides are together at the fundament, and let the size be across, so that he is wide on both sides, and inside is tight, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; by chance press there who is between the fundament, so that it does not work; and you know that there is a piece of stone or angles and edges: so it is good to come out; and if there is a part that is souer, similar to a diamond, and round, from whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s'elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu'elle n'eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l'estrainche de vitriole; et s'il i a plus d'une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s'il en i a plusors.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If the stone is large, it should be removed with care and a wider wound made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Car II things come to the disease: where he dies, or his urine comes soon by the which the leach cannot be joined; but yet thou dost thou effort to draw, or to tear with nails so long as thou canst draw it by pieces; and when thou hast accomplished thy work, then employ the wound with incense and aloe and blood of a dragon, and bind it, and put upon it a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to cool the abscess; then untie the disease from his neck, and do not loosen the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if you arise well the oil and water place, then cure it with oil of asafoetida and oil of basil, until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrosion, and congealed blood in the bladder, and is held back this way that it does not jump with urine: then put there what thou art able in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it out; then lift the wound with water and ash and silk, and help him in all ways as you can, until he is healthy; and it is necessary that every day that you cure him, you bind his two legs, and put medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is placed in the urinary bladder, and stuck there, and the urine cannot come out; if you cut this as I have said, so that you shorten it many times, it is excised from the cutting.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this out.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take care not to cut it according to this form, and be sure to stick it on three sides in a piece of wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and polish the edge of the stone as much as you can; then put the file back in the stone slightly, so that it does not come out; then press your hand on what is held in the stone, so that the urine comes out; and then remove the file from your hand bit by bit until the stone comes out.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is suddenly broken and shoots out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this for any reason that hinders it, then file the stone and another on top of it, then remove it firmly, and take off the line, and wash away the frozen blood that is in the wound; and apply the cure as long as he is well.
de la piere des femmes	of women's bones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Poc avient that bone should be broken in women, and if it has happened once, let there be grief for three things: one is that per chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well to strip off the clothes, even when she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that per chance one cannot find a woman who knows well to strip off the clothes, even when she is married; and the fourth way is that the woman's bone should be more perfectly broken than the man's, so that it can be sliced deeper and more carefully; and if there is necessity, send for a mistress who knows well in this art of hands; and if you do not find one, do not look for a virgin.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S'elle la trueve, si covient qu'elle la déplace avec force depuis l'entrée de la vessie jusqu'à l'extérieur, tant qu'elle vient à la racine de la cuisse; puis coupe sur la pierre en la racine de la cuisse contre le milieu du cône, là où il est mouillé, et sentez la pierre dans cette partie; et ne déplace pas ses deux côtés au-dessus de la pierre ou à l'extérieur, et soit sa taille au premier petit; puis bouttez le rait dans la taille, si vous sentez la pierre tellement proche de la plaie que la pierre puisse sortir facilement, et sachez que de nombreuses manières de pierres existent: c'est à savoir, petites et grandes, rugueuses et lisses, longues et rondes, et qui ont des rainures.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If it bleeds, then know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it stops, then put vinegar on the wound, and hold it for an hour until the wound stops bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and has instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work; and if it stops, and it is the artery that is cut, put the powder on the spot and drain blood and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, for by chance might die the patient; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire has subsided, and the leech is finished, if it returns to your work, until the stone is far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia with pain
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The water of rose is not other than the assembly of moisture or white styphn, which is desoz lu keur of the coions, that contains the yolk; and is called "styphn", and never is properly in the net of the yolk, if one thinks that it is another oef; and this skin of the coion between the white styphn that we have said; and this does not happen to be poc non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes to the coions, and is spread out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does this come of percussion on the coions, and this moisture has many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and it happens more; and these are the signs of the assembly, for if it is the white styphn that we have said, it is the reons apostemes, the long I as the shape of an oef, and does not open the coions, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscesses are with part of the egg white, and because of this it is thought that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white syfac, then he feels it well; so that when you want to know the color of the moisture, then try all the testicles, from which its shape is in front.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the introducer, judge who is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be made well according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and covers himself with drapes; then he sits on his left side, and orders the minister to sit on his right, and extends the whip at one of the two ribs between the testicles; then he takes the spatemile, and cuts the leather of the testicles among them until the finger joint, and is a clean split in two parts, dividing the leather of the testicles little by little according to the ability; then he perforates the white syfac with water at a wide hole, and removes all the water, and then puts his fingers, and stops the syfac upstream; and do not touch the testicles, but only the syfac; cut it all or in pieces separately the leather of him little by little, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return; and if the egg were to go to your work, it would go back to its place when you have completed the work of the syfac; then join the two testicles together with a stitch, then cure it as the others, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lay down the suspenders, in doubt of the decay of blood; then cut off the bag to all the suspender, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then cut off the other part as you did with the first one evenly, and wash away the blood, and put on another moistened cloth with oil rosin; and put away another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and put over the two bags, and put double drapings above them, and tie it all up according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two drapings, and fill them with woolen rags according to this shape, and let them be joined by sewing in the girdle of the vestments, and one of the heads preys on the foundation until the back, and the other head on the two shoulders, and let all be joined by the restraint in the loop of the vest; and no medicine of this ramice of cautery in place of an iron size, and it is that you prey I subtile cautery of fire, and cut off the skin of the bags, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syph of the egg is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white syph once, and burn it with this subtle cautery of fire:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu puces, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l'uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And pour on the poultice in all ways that you can, until it is completely dry; and be sure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and keep your mind clear of pain in the back, and move quickly about the cutting off of the limbs; and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or pain in the back or anything else, so cure what makes you uncomfortable according to what has been said before.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the appendix
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Understand that in this part of the text there are many possible situations, so it seems better to leave them alone; and I will tell you about the work and appearance of an appendix.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many appendices come from the entrails, and most often from the intestines; and this is due to chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	That is to say, by the acrid and damp excess that spreads to the intestines, or by impact; and the color of the appendix depends on the color of the entrails; it does not cause pain, but it is painful; and perhaps an appendix will be gray and hard, and of a pale color, and never comes from a vein or swelling in the leg.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, if you feel the appendix with your fingers, and touch it gently; it is not necessary that you press hard.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l'expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocated shoulder, due to moisture, must be reset immediately. When resetting, it cannot be allowed to remain in place for too long, as the joint will move out of its natural position; this results in a misaligned limb, causing great pain and injury to the patient. To correct this, one must carefully reset the dislocation, taking care not to damage any surrounding joints or nerves. Once the shoulder is correctly positioned, the affected area should be gently massaged to restore blood flow and ease any discomfort.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the break is located behind the shoulder, all parts of the bone must be carefully reset to ensure proper alignment. This involves gently moving and manipulating the broken ends until they are correctly positioned. Once the break has been reduced, any swelling or pain should subside, and the patient can begin the process of healing.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, if you employ the wound with wool wetted in oil and wine, then the healer will apply other treatments until he is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an aposteme wrapped in a wrapping resembling the bursa, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans greatly when he goes; and the healer of this disease so well fears as that before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old one did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a soft seat, and then pour the suspensory of the testicles down his throat with both hands, all the vessels that are near the penis, and dry them well; and then peel off each part as we said in the extraction of the arteries which are in temples; then he fixes an needle where there is double thread, and ties it to the first place where the vein has come, and quickly ties it to the other end; then he covers them correctly, according to the length of the cors, and removes the moist corruption; then heal the wound as the others, or if one of the vessels bleeds, so that no vessel loses its blood by the incision of the vessels, and dry them and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	about the surgery of the syphils
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	about the surgery of the syphils The signs of this section are if it is poking and poking slowly over time, and the apses are even until almost completely healed, so that the syphilis does not hurry the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	and the signs are if it is sudden pain when it comes to the section of the syphils, and the apses are different appearances, separating from the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the course away from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	and never does the bowel descend with the intestines, and is held back, and makes the patient suffer great pain, even if it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron from fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron from fear, because it is necessary to avoid them. Command the patient to keep the intestine in its place within the wound, if he can; then tie the neck between your hands, and cut off the skin of the legs; then take off the membrane covering the skin of the legs, all the way down; then bottle up the blood vessels of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and let it flow; then scrape off the skin that is covered by the membrane, until the white skin appears on all sides; then bottle the two index fingers in the place where the leg meets the skin, in the part that is between the white skin that covers the thigh, and the next one, and apart from behind the thigh, and between the next one; and with your right hand reach up to the skin of the legs, and hold the thigh skin high with your left hand, and squeeze the blood out of all the skin; and command the minister to stretch the thigh skin tight, and untie what is tied behind it; and feel on both sides with your two hands if there is any wrapped-up intestine or white skin that is hard, and if you do not find anything, then pour in until it is full; then take a needle that has X thick thread made of II filaments, and bottle it up at the back part of the skin, which is behind the skin of the legs; after the waist, then tie the ends of the filaments together, so that there are IIII filaments; then join them crosswise, and tie on the skin that we have already mentioned that is behind the skin of the legs, with a strong thread of II parts; then wrap the filament ends around, and tie them together, so that no small threads can enter where they grow out, and an abscess does not come; and most importantly, tie the thread according to the first long thread of II fingers of that one, and after these two threads leave some of the skin that is behind the skin of the legs, a good distance; then, after all the others according to the length that the leg carries; then wrap the part that is behind the skin of the legs, until it is tight, and squeeze it out as we have said before; then bring moist wool and put it in the wounds, and tie on the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the cord as long as it grows by itself; and if it delays in growth, so be heated with hot water, and apply to what we have said, as long as it grows; then cure the wound with other cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia of the abdomen
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	I have never seen anyone in this region dare to make the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancient ones said that it is done so that the cable is together, in this way tying the vessels, after cutting lightly on the leg above; then sew it, and cure the abscess of him who has it, as long as the vessels grow, and cure it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No version comes routure in the angers, if as we have said, and open its channels; and do not send any of the intestines to the coions, and if one is sent, it is little, and re-sets every hours; and nevertheless, if it remains too long at this point, so believes the wound or syphac, until the intestines are sent; and that happens because of the extension of the syphac which is in the angers, as we have said, for it is extended, then it becomes softened and swollen its channels and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have before said; and never is cured by iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cope the place of the routure with a large piece according to the quantity of III; and then remove the syphac which is under the skin that follows, then take the thread and put it on the apparent place of the syphac; and press it perfectly to the belly, then cut the two apparent channels of the syphac on the head of the thread, and cut each one; then remove the head of the thread, and do not cover the syphac or extend the hoof or any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the ramose intestines; then heal it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you sew up the wounds, if the skin is broken and the wound heals, then let it heal.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The cicatrix is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterization is damp in that place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the gloves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the gloves becomes soft in some men, because the waddings that are within them are softened, and one can see it; and it is necessary, when you treat him, to make a incision on his back, and to cut off the soft leather on top of the natural leather; then join the two lips with one stitch or three firm stitches; then cut off the excess of the soft leather with three more stitches; then sew them together, and cure it as you would other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Fire cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	I know that chastisements are forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of them in this book; and they are necessary only in two ways: one is that the mirror should answer when it is asked, and heal with the help of medicine; and the other is because we have often had to use fire chastisements on certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and hares and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that chastisements are made in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the animal in hot water, until the testicles are softened and during; then grab them with your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the size chastisement: it is necessary that you take the animal and put it in hot water, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and tie each eye to I kop as you have well scalthed them; and leave no little wound of the syfac and subtle medicine that is over the vesels; and this way of chastisement is milder than that which is done by attraction, because perhaps in attraction there remains some of the testicles, by which the animal desires luxure; then heal the wound as soon as it has healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	are due to two causes: first, because between the two testicles there is a space like that of a woman's figure, and he has hair, and sometimes his urine flows short.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the second way is in women, and above the loins also as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the remedy for a man and woman is that you cut the scrotum, and treat it as you would other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps out of the skin of the testicles, there is no remedy.
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	is an abnormal growth on the natural part, so much so that it is ugly to behold; and some women have it as well as a hand, and this is the remedy.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you cut the excess of the tetanus with your finger or a scissor, and do it lightly; and do not cut it too much, lest there be bleeding, then treat it with another remedy until it is well; and there is another growth that comes out at the mouth of the woman, and he uses it, and perhaps it will fly away, and it resembles a cow's head, and for this they called it the 'old cow disease'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to put it, as we have said before, the tentigenous, and treat it until it is healthy.
de erratique	de erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If the errant is when nature of the woman is not yet perceived, or the buttock is small; and is characterized by birth, or happens by disease that has come about; or it is by chaste husbandry, or by subtle medicine or spice, and is perfected in marriage, or in costard, or desoiler, or whatever; and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the movement of the hips.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stooping is near, appearing suddenly, whether it be to the left or to the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the subtle medicine is near, approaching suddenly, whether it be to the left or to the right. If it is by subtle medicine, and it is close to the lips, if you hurry, and return again: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two lips, as long as the subtle medicine approaches, and let the stooping happen; then take wool, and moisten it with oil, and put it in place, and lie the woman on her back every day, so that he cannot hold it.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the medicine is tough and thick, then you should prepare it like a leaf of myrrh in the spatulum.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the poultice is dry and thick, then suspend it with a string and cover it; and apply the medicines that stop the pain, as in the case of dragon's blood, incense, mixed with alumen; then put on a large piece of lint, so that the wound cannot heal; and let it be for a long time, and apply the medicine again until he is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	When the wound begins to heal, if you cover it in this way, there will be no scarring.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For when the wound is healing and has been scarred, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Are due to an opening of the veins, and when they are old they become thready; and we have said in the treatment of the signs and symptoms of the diseases, and I will say here those which cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the anus, when they are perfectly in the birth, and do not appear at the sense, except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the birth, they can be felt, are those who can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then tie her with tongs, and wrap her in roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, as well as it happens and blood of dragon and incense, and similar things; then pour her legs against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the blood comes, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galens and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit it with honey and easily, and make an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it has stopped bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if not, let him make a poultice on the back and massage it gently without hurting him; then take another, and pour the juice of plants or of hawthorn with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, let him keep the wound clean until it is well; and what is called "balath" is red, and resembles a sharp stone, so cover it as I have said above; and then cure it until it is well.
des apostemes de la marris	of the mari
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Various forms of abscesses arise in the genitals, such as syphilis, painful abscesses, herpes, suppurating sores, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the preceding section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the abscess which comes in the breast, which is not an abscess except that it is hot; and if you know the work of iron, you will see that the abscess is red when it begins to come, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So then you should not hurry to pierce it, but let the pain subside; and then place the patient on a bed, and put two small pillows under him so that his legs are raised, and his feet are spread out from each other, and let them be tied firmly with a good knot; then suck the bile towards his left side, and bring in the instrument which is used to operate on the mouth of the breast, from which afterwards comes the shape; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you should first feel the depth of the breast, so that what enters into the instrument does not come in more deeply than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the breast with cloths, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he puts the cone of the instrument on top, and darkens the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened, and one holds the hand softly, if it is convenient to cover the head, to the spitful; and when the bowels are voided, if it is convenient that you put into the wound tents wet with oil of roses or with green oil dry; and place the tent outside the wound at the very edge of the marrow, and place on the other side of the marrow and on the other hand a net wet with water or with pomegranates cooked; then he will be healed after two days' ointment coming to this, as long as it is healthy; and no time does one lift up the marrow and the wound by the cupping of water and honey, and then by water or roots of licorice and aniseet long cooked; then you will return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is closed in the marrow, keep yourself from cooking with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is a good thing to know first the natural form of childbirth, and the signs that come with it: when you see the woman rush down below, and yearn to smell the air: then the baby quickly comes out; then you know that these childrens are according to the natural form, and the issue comes from her head, and the second one with him; and when you see those signs, then lightly press her belly, so that the baby comes quickly; for when it descends on her head, then the second one is with him, and the married man is purged of his excesses by good purification; and what comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes upon its feet, and comes from the neck or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes upon her belly, or sometimes, and is turned around by accident on her throat, and in other evil shapes; it is a good thing for the bailiff to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and delusion, and I will show you all the shapes how one must help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby is stuck in the mother's womb and her virtue is weak, so that if she sits on a saddle, or women hold it; then let the oil of ghee be cooked, and then pour the milk between her two small testicles, of which this shape is made.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If the baby is stuck in the mother's womb and her virtue is weak, so that if she sits on a saddle, or women hold it; then let the oil of ghee be cooked, and then pour the milk between her two small testicles, of which this shape is made. And split the second one, and cut off his nail as much as the moisture is gone; and press the woman's belly until the baby comes out, and if he does not come out, it is necessary to massage the woman with ghee oil with sesame oil; then let her press and shake for an hour: now the baby will come.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, it is necessary that you pull them back gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up; then step down from the stool, and tie the woman so she does not fall over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, if the hands are held to the knife that has been placed in front, and the child is taken out, and pulled back evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes down on its feet, it is necessary to turn it over gently; and then turn it little by little until it is even; and then stretch it out little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can't he jump just as high as his knees, if she is ordered to bend, and makes her quiver with fear; if he jumps, let God help him.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not turn it little by little, as we have said, until it is in the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For then it becomes lighter. And if he does not come as we have said, take muscellaige of alyssum, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all up in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and cover this ointment, then let her sit in water until she is wet to the ribs; and when she is wet, she takes the chain of mirrior, and puts it on, and leaves it for an hour; then lets her sit down, then makes her shake and straining her mouth and her neck, and lightly pinches her belly, because now the wound does not hurt.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child between her legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the baby comes in this form, if you put the ball between his hands little by little; then let him be supported on his neck, and his legs hang down, and he lies on the bed; and he bends his hands little by little, and then he takes them against his stomach, and he pulls out the pubic hair as far as it is shaved; and if the baby does not move, if he grabs his legs and moves his legs, then he moves his stomach to the side, then you put your hands; and you hold the child little by little; and tell the woman to lie down until the baby comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	When the baby comes out wide, one hand is held up
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	If you cannot bring the hand back, get the woman to stand up and go; if she cannot walk, make her lie down on the bed, and push her legs together; then I will tell you about the muscle relaxer; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to bring the hand back; and let the child come out according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and tell her to lie down until the baby comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	in the birth of the child upon his neck, and it has spread its hands wide, and its face turned toward its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I will have the doctor take a bath, then little by little dry it off and oil it gently; and when it is even, as we have said, then tell him to move little by little; and when you have done this, set her down on a chair, and tell her to lean back; and the girl shall be shaken.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner for all the second time
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When he comes in this way for the second time, if the child has been caught by the foot, as long as the moisture is gone; and if the man has tied himself around the face and neck, so that he cannot move, let him fall to the ground, that he does not stay up, and die the man; then put the child inside, as soon as you have done it right, and tell the woman to lean back once: then if she moves a little.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born many times, and never more than three or four at a time; and this is not an extraordinary thing, and it has often happened.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an extraordinary thing, and they do not live if only one is born; I know that, when they are multiple, they are dislocated by the leech who devises them, which is tied to the badness of the blood; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born with pain, as we have said, and the leech is subtle and does so quickly and lightly what she does; and do so that it may serve for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No one is formed from two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise king, and knows that the leech can do all this, for sometimes similar things happen; so he does according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work by hand; if it is necessary that you know that the woman is of sound health, and has no accident or she fears death; if it is necessary that the woman be sore on her back, and her hips are inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister paints her with oil from two parts, where she lies in bed so that she cannot be treated for the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils with almiseen and fenugreek and linseed seed, then anoint the minister's hands with these oils and these almiseens; then pour them into the woman lightly, then wants him to let it out or he holds it in his hands so that the descent is on his head; then he puts the strings in her hair or in her neck or in her mouth or at her throat or near her ribs, and the descent is on the feet, then he pierces it or pinches it and cuts it near the costes; and it is necessary that he dye the string with his right hand, and he puts the loop between his two left hands, and he pours it all lightly with his right hand, and he puts the string in any of the places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the string:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then give me another one, or the tier that you need it for, so that the extractions are equal; and then make them equal by moving one from the other, to allow them to come out, and have the teeth of the oncines hold them in place, as this is the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part of it stops, so oigne some of its two oils, and pour them into that part, and pull the other part; and if none of it stops, put this oncene or higher up, and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot bring it back due to the tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it is all out; then cover with oil in the joint of the sole or at the neck, and do the same on the other hand, and on the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et si la tête du bébé est gros et il est coincé dans le canal de naissance, ou il a une pointe aiguë assemblée, alors vous devez presser le spasme épineux entre vos deux mains, et faire pivoter la pointe et l'extraire; ou vous le ronds avec l'outil qui est appelé "almidach", de sorte que sa forme vient avec les outils ou le chapître qui est après celui-ci; et ainsi même, il se forme une grande tête naturellement; puis retirez fermement les os avec des tenailles, et la tête du bébé saut dans la forceps, et il est extrait avec force, s'il est fendu, jusqu'à ce que l'humidité qui est à l'intérieur de la naissance soit éliminée; et si elle ne peut pas sortir, alors vous le brisez en morceaux avec la main; et si elle est gonflée dans l'estomac ou sous les côtes, alors vous devez la percer jusqu'à ce que l'humidité s'échappe.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is trapped on its feet, then the slight pulling is good, and the re-setting is towards the mouth of the wound.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is trapped in the abdomen or chest, then cover it with a cloth wrapped over the hand; and cut into the abdomen or chest as much as the moisture comes; and if another member has been dislocated and does not move, then tie the ball to the hand firmly from the wound, and pull it out towards the mouth of the wound; then tie one end or two, and pull with force; and if the mouth of the wound is constricted by an abscess that has come up, then do not work, but treat with wet and greasy things; and treat with poultices, and cut into the abscess with sharp, wet things and moisten it.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is trapped on its ribs, and you can make them even, then treat as we said above for a live child; and if you have no power, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done so, let him bring those who have said that come to the sea; and if the fever comes from the sand, let it be restrained in water, and let him bring other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been opened, and one of her children was dead, but she consulted another on it, and another also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the fever rose again and began to cause great harm.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't stop the wound from festering.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a poultice of strong attraction, and in it was an arm bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed at this, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bone of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to heal the wound, and with my own hands, as long as the woman was in better shape; and he waited a long time until she was well again, and there was a little swelling at the site; and I do not remember this chapter before, except that when the master sees something strange, he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her bed
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressure, where we fix the shoulders; and turning them around, we put them back in their place.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be thinner than the restriction, and made of oak or beech; and the mouth should be wide, and the margin of the teeth narrow, and long, a palm and a half or a little more; and these two supports are to be fixed in the mouth on either side, one above and one below, so that they touch each other, a palm and a half or a little more long; and these two supports are to be fixed in the mouth on either side, one above and one below, so that they touch each other, a palm and a half or a little more long.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, à sa ressemblance plus subtile et plus légère, soit faite de fust d'ébène ou de buis, selon l'apparence des tenailles ; et ait aux deux chais deux ajoutsements, si comme tu vois, d'une paume de long, et deux doigts de large ; et lorsqu'tu as vu ouvrir la mari à tout l'instrument, si fasse s'assoir la femme sur le lit, les pieds pendant et les jambes ouvertes, puis boutte les deux ajoutsements ajoutés ensemble en la mari, et tient le chef de l'instrument dosé entre ses cuisses ; puis ouvres ta main à tout l'instrument, si comme tu as fait aux tenailles également, selon la quantité que tu as vue ouvrir la bouche de la mari, jusqu'à ce que le bailey fasse ce qu'elle veut.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted and multiplied for appearance; and when you see them prepared, the faster it is worked, and the higher for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I do not trust you with the instrument, then you have no excuse for your negligence, because their necessity cannot be excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second one is due to give birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to keep her hair tied back, and then make her turn her head from side to side, and hold her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she faints because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, then I can try, and I will make a cup or pot with a spout from which the steam will come out into the mother's mouth, as if it were vaporized; then I will put one tube or spout in the pot, and the other in the mother's mouth, and I will let the vapors rise inside the mother; then I will make her turn her head so that she vomits what is inside her, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If one has a second wound.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains after this cure and is not better, order her to soak her left hand in oil of rosemary or musk for a long time, and then let it go, and if she finds the second wound, then squeeze and stretch it little by little correctly so that the marrows do not break; but you must move it slightly from side to side, and then pull it out; if so, it will fall off.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the marrow is swollen and tight, we have spoken about the cure of sneezing and inhaling herbs; and if she does not respond to all that we have said, you must be careful not to make a mistake when you pull it out; but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the marrow, you tie him to the woman's belly, then cleisterize with ointment of four-fold tallow; if so, she will sneeze and recover, but nevertheless, when she sneezes, a bad odor will come out of her stomach and head, and she will be pale.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is appropriate then let there be smoke-cations that are convenient for him: no one of the ancients has tried the smoke-cations of nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the holding of the flowers and of the second one if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like to see a dog, and one puts the thin head in the nature, and the chaps wide on the fire; and let be the smoke-cations on the coals, and the tan until it is used up, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but it is pierced by a subtil surgery: if it is appropriate then at the ball that he pierce that surgery to his right, and does not pierce him with a spatumile acquired, and seal the wound so that he does not touch; then put on another wet one in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until he is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, put or pierce a cane of plunk, and let him hold his hands up, and let the bone be set when he goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And no sudden recovery comes from a wound or abscess; if it is covered suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said of the cane of plunk.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nadation, and more painful than those that come from the base of the foundation in two parts, whether it is one or more; and when this nadation is old, if it is opened, and then moistened with a white or subtle poultice, and never does these fistulas persist; and they are caused by what is discharged or wind from the patient when he makes egestion, and by chance in salt water.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it pierces to the bladder, and only to half of the penis; and reach up to the join of the loins, and only up to the knuckle of the hand.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And then recognize that the fistula penetrates to the foundation, and not further; and it is so that you pierce your little finger or foundation, and pierce a small needle of gold or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you pierce a tent of gold or a mane of horse as far as you feel the tent or mane in your little finger; and if you do not feel it, there will be no piercing pain or wind or sight, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates only up to the bladder or up to the urinary conduit, if the urine leaps out, and cannot be controlled by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced only up to the joint of the thigh, then the effort should come only up to its place. If there is no twist and the pain does not come from within, then as soon as it has been bowie'd [bowied?], there is no medicine or immediate relief by feeling; and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure but work, and vanity of foolish men who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those that are not persisting and are not old, there is hope of health by surgery, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his loins, and his loins are bent towards his belly; then pour a shower of rain, or of water if there is any twist, until you know where the effort comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foot, then it is appropriate that you place your index finger on it and feel for the tendon; and so that you can find out whether it has been torn or not, you will feel between your thumb and the finger, and so you know that it is persisting; if it does not work, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	If the patient feels pain in the foot, then it is appropriate that you place your index finger on it and feel for the tendon; and so that you can find out whether it has been torn or not, you will feel between your thumb and the finger, and so you know that it is persisting; if it does not work, then it cannot be healed. On the other hand, there are some that can be very well healed, but this only happens sometimes; and the help that is given to them is that, according to the width of the fistula, a fine fire should be made; and pour it directly into the fistula, as much as necessary to stop the pain at the base; and do this twice or three times, until you know that those charred feathers are burned, which look like an eagle's feather; and then cure the wet blisters by wrapping them in bandages, so that those blisters turn black, then bind them with ointment, joining the blister and the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healthy, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is sick, then it is good; and if he tries to get between them, and does not pierce all the way up to the root which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of tar or of oil between the two, and you see the fistula at that place where the covering comes off from the root; then the handle of the entrapment of the fistula, and press it back before the covering, and then apply the cautery afterwards, as long as it comes up to the top of the covering; and then the covering will be torn away, and there will remain nothing but a small spot; then have made for yourself tar-made hats that look like an owl's feather, and there shall be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun does not shine on him, and he cuts between you and the work, then the fire cautery or the medicinal potion will cut it.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c'est a savoir, l'arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l'esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when he has been restored, then he is healthy and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes only to the foundation, and is removed from the heart, it causes him great pain; and ask those who know.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	And if you feel the tent, and between is the towel or the cloth or the sack, or it is ready to pierce, there are only two ways of hope and engagement: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or you pierce it little by little as first; and do not go too far in complete healing, so that you cover the covering which holds the foundation, and let the discharge come voluntarily; then heal it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean up after it has been cut from the foundation, or with a tent or another instrument used; then burn off that rotten wood which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and delay the fistula in the part away from the foundation: this is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times when there are fistulas according to this way: and it is when you patch the tent in the fistula, and it is or it costs from the base of the delicate skin on top, so take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I patch I thread wrong in 2, and patch the tent all along the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin at the base inside, then remove the thread of that pierced, so that you patch your two at the base; and tie the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and draw them apart, and leave it for a day or two; and do not restrain it, until the thread catches those hairs that are between the two, and chaffs; then cure the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all ways that you can, unless it is too much perfumed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make the lacing cover it perfectly, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the sputum with thorns from which one makes a fistula is too aggressive for one side and not aggressive enough for the other; and because it does not suit to cover completely what should be covered, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	For hemorrhoids are in two ways: either they are inside the fundament, as grain of resin, and there are little and big ones, and some are dry, and others moist but not too much, and they have a color like that of the body; and the cure for those who are inside the fundament is such that you command the patient to strain himself in order to go to the chamber, until the fundament goes away, and the thread comes out; if you hurry, and hold it with tweezers, or with your fingernail, then cut off its roots; and if it does not hold itself by its moisture, take it by a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of calico; and pull them towards your fingers, then cut them off, and powder them with some hot powders that are in the fire for cauterizing; or you cauterize them as we have said in the chapter of cauterization, since they can be cured by other treatments until they are well; and if the fundament cannot come out, so it is cleansed with a strong enema and harsh, so that it comes out freely; when the patient feels pain, and the thread comes out from the fundament, then the cure is light; and it is that you hold them with your fingernail or tweezers, cut off, then cure as we have said, until they are well, and avoid the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you prepare the wound in this way: take a tortuous thread, and bottle it into a needle, and then wind the thread over and pierce the needle from the other side, and twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, and if it is wide; then pull the thread into shape, and tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave it to flow blood; then put a moistened drape on the foundation, soaked in oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to rest. And then let him rest until he is hemmed, and when he has healed, cure him with ointment and other cures until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	doux
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 종종 장의 끝에서 건조함이 발생하고, 자연스럽게 변비가 생기며, 병에 걸린 사람이 나이가 많고 의약품은 도움이 되지 않습니다.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you need to cut the bark off a tree or your nail, which should not be allowed to rot; then cure it as long as it is sound so that it does not rot again; and if it cannot be cured, then start to scrape it more strongly than before, until it heals and the bark has been removed; then cure it as long as it is healthy.
dou fremit	The patient should suck on a cold compress.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	For a small piece of wood to rub against the body thoroughly, and one can feel it all over the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the doctor should take a feather from an goose, or a strong vultur's feather, and put that feather on the friction, until the purple circle surrounds the entire area; then turn your hand over the entire feather as you chop it all around the area, and put it in place, and scrape the friction from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so make this of a dog's head or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And do not hit it, so that you keep him in two places, and press it: And if you see, so cauterize the pain, as he is before or chapter of cauterization of fire.
de la forme dou clistere	from the form of the clistere
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No time made one clistere of silver or oakwood, or melted bronze or brass; and no time made these instruments small and large, according to these which are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then, on that one bring in the cure of infants and who are feeble and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clistere small and big if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say that there is a distention where the belly is tied, so you see, and the loins are pierced from within; and one of the sides is split, and in the other; and let the belly where one lays medicines from a bladder of cow or parchment, and pierce all around the small splits, and leave between each split a space of X inches, then pour into these splits a strong string of thread twisted in X shape: and when the medicine is inside, if it adheres to the instrument before a strong string, then draw out; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or amberwax or some other thing with which to grease the head of the cystere, then pour it lightly; then the ministers stretch their two hands together so that he is all full, then remove the head of the cystere, and raise the legs of the patient against the wall, and let the medicine come out as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you bandage it in a disease of decay from the abdomen, and the medicine hastens to come out, if you continue it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the root or abscess, so is the cautery also fine as for a child; and this is the form of the fine cautery where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made, and according to their places where they are made, and because of this.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things because of which wounds are made are by hitting with a stone, and cutting with a sword or a knife, or a lance or a club or a stake, or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that splits on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds, for the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes where the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or a similar thing, and the skin is torn all around, and the wound is large, and you doubt about the abscess being hot: if you do this quickly, he will heal from the head itself if the blood comes only from the wound, and the healing will be in the opposite direction of the injured part; and deny the patient wine and fatty meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not heal, if his meat is reduced, and he does not drink wine, nor eat cheese; and put on the wound, if an abscess forms, wet it with oil and vinegar, or with stinging wine; and if there is no abscess, if the wound is fresh and not moved by the wind, powder, which I will say a little later; and if he has moved it, put on some onions, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large as a sword-blade and similar, the lips cannot be sewn together smoothly, but must be sewn together roughly, as I will say to the wounds of the belly from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and can only be held together with a few stitches, then sew the wound with medicine and restore it with hard cloth instead of leather; and order the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles and roasted wheat, as well as poultry and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find leather rotting, and it has reached the bone, then sew it tightly, and pour it strongly, then heal it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light; and that you put this powder which hardens as the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of this powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and bind it together, as long as she is well healed and joins all her blood; and then bind it tightly, and leave it undissolved, if it swells; for we do not tie the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And no one makes this powder only, unless one has incense and dragon's blood, but the fire moves it.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound, surely it is clean, unless one puts some of this powder on it; but put on some digestive oil or flour of barley made with water and honey until it is dry; then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about fractures of the head afterward.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound at the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is at the throat, and there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the throat is cut where the artery lies:
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the throat that is affected, then there should be no other intention but to allow the wound to heal, and not to place anything restraining upon it, for this would hinder healing and cause withdrawal; and nothing should be placed on the wound except what is cold, for the substance of the throat is cold, and its connection with the skull, which is the highest limb, is through the jaw; but let the medicine be as warm as mutton washed in soft water, and mixed with oil of roses, and let it be washed also in soft water, and other small stones according to this manner, and let it be anointed with moist oil.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bandage it tightly and treat until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full ofbowels, then pierce or cut deeper; and if an artery is cut, and blood flows, so that it dries up and turns black, and cauterize that way; and if the inflammation in the throat is cut, or damaged, and the direction is guarded, so that the meat goes, if the juice is cut high on the jaw of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it back to its natural shape; and then tie tightly, and leave it for a few days, then treat with ointments which are useless until it is healed; and if the wound has impressed into the bone, then pierce it; and if there are pieces of bone, then push them up hard, and those that you cannot push, then leave them until the wound festers and comes out in its own way; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle with powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound, and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in the previous chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look out for wind-purging in the patient: because then the wound is deadly; and if it is not deep and is fresh to all its vital power, then do not put on powder at first, nor bind it so that it does not move perfectly, and return to the core, and ease the pain; but put on an ointment, and bind it II times a day; and if you have no ointment, put in the wound dry cotton to soak up the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for III days, or IIII, or more often; then you will not get spasms or bad tremors from the core; and when you see the bones in good positions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the cancer with drugs and other treatments as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot be cured, operate, then tie up that which has become a fistula; do so as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a spear or knife and it is deep, stitch it up; if it is shallow, use powder, and if it has broken into pieces of bone, mend the wound, and the sharp ends, if they are sticking out; and if they are not sticking out, let them fester, so that there will be less extraction work; and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Abdominal rupture is great and large and small; from a big wound, the intestines sometimes come out, or the intestines are caught by the cut, so the entry of air is stopped, and the stitch is less difficult, and no more than a small wound hurts them; because if we do not put them back together, step by step, they swell up so much that they feel cold, then we put them back together, and for smaller wounds, it is the same as for bigger ones, so I will say each one separately and will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestines has come out, there are two ways to deal with it: either because the wound is small, as we have said; or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat it in one of the following ways: dip a sponge or a thin cloth in warm water only; or cook it in warm wine and cumin and spice, and remove the intestine as much as it swells; and never stop doing this, and let it rest that it may cool down.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling disappear, if you moisten the intestine with water or with wine and herbs are cooked, because by this it is softened a little; and if it cannot enter, then cut a little hole in the wound with the instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to let it rest, that we do not cut it unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for it: if you cut it from within and take it away, and look at it like this:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are protruding, if you can reset it according to its natural shape in its proper place, for this is difficult to do.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the part near the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part near the navel, then put the head and chest higher than the parts near; and so one should treat what I have said in large and painful wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you should prepare the patient, then take two hands and insert a needle filled with thread into the wound from its back part; gather the lips together; and this is the common way of sewing, and it is necessary that you press one side of the wound, and take a strong thread; then pierce the skin on both sides of the wound with a needle, keeping the space between them consistent; then make an X-shaped stitch to join the two edges; finally, take another double thread, pass it through the needle from two directions, leaving a little gap between each stitch; continue this way until you have covered all the wound; and the needles should be medium size, because small ones can easily go through the skin, while large ones cannot enter well; for this reason, it is necessary to use medium-sized needles; do not insert the needles too far into the flesh or skin, so that they do not pierce and cause the wound to open before it is sewn together; then secure the needle ends, so that they do not sting the patient while he sleeps; and place a cloth or bandage over the needle ends to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound has healed; and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds; because, if you sew one side of a large wound, you will need two needles and a strong thread; and when you have pierced both edges of the wound with the needle, join them together with an X-shaped stitch; then take another double thread and pass it through the needle from both sides, leaving a little space between each stitch; continue in this way until all the wound is sewn together; and these needles should be medium-sized, because small ones can easily go through the skin, while large ones cannot enter well: for this reason, medium-sized needles are necessary; and it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh or skin, so that they do not pierce and open the wound before it has been sewn together; then secure the needle ends, so that they do not sting the patient while he sleeps; and place a cloth or bandage over the needle ends to hold them in place; and leave them until the wound has healed.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine when it had been outside for 22 hours, and the wound was縫ed together after 15 days, and I healed it, and it was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not heal it with ointment, because I was in a place where there was no ointment to be found, nor any medicines; and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water as long as he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two ways of stitching: take the needle and pierce it from the outside in to the middle; when it has gone through the flesh, turn the thread so that it comes out on the other side of the wound; and the understanding of this stitch is such that you sew just as the skin-layerer does with fur, and leave one end of the thread on one side, and take up the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing, which Galen dealt with properly, if it is so that there is no font, which joins the two parts together in a natural way, and applies one of the heads to the other head in such a way: thread a needle from the tip of one of the heads nearest the mirach, and pierce that hole only, leaving the two heads joined; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part jusc’à celui dedens, through the two heads; then pierce each of them from the outside part jusc’à celui dedens, in the two other heads that are on the other side; and this is the manner of sewing with the blade and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And for this Galen has such a word, and no one testifies against it: that one should sew the abdomen with two needles, or there should be thread in each; and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew leather; and know that when the rupture is at the belly's end, such a stitch is more painful than any other.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l'ait muee, si remet arer l'intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l'ait muée, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu'il soit sané; et se tu n'as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu'elle comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant qu'il soit sané.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you do not need other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will communicate with the principal members, then you should moisten another light thing in tempred oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and burn the pads; and if pain or pus appears in the balls, and often happens, then wash them with black wine, and most surely the pus comes up to the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "jejunum", cannot heal when they are torn, and this is because of the location of veins, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and because it approaches its nature to that of a newborn.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the flesh jumps out of the wound, put it back behind just as the intestine is, while it is fresh; and if it has become old and has turned black, you must find the place that is black, from which no blood comes, because there are veins and arteries; then cut between the two bones, and hang them from the side of the wound until the extraction jumps out, and the wound bleeds.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, you can restore it in some cases, as if someone were torn by an arrow or a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became convoluted and turned into a fistula, and there was vomiting and wind; I put on it according to what I could, and did not cease to apply subtility until it healed, and sewed up the incisions.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him mend, I doubted that the patient would be ill in his belly; and there was no evil, but tarried in better dispositions, and feasted and drank; and said no experimenters that when he has a little wound in the intestine, it should be bound somewhat: take sharp things from great testes, then bring the lips of the wound together, and when the sharp things have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that she draws her mouth out; and then he takes hold of the head, and this remains so that he cannot release it, then puts another sharp thing after in the same way as before, until the wound is all taken care of; and let the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief is burnt in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal in some way: take the chief of this thread of intestine that has been almost severed, and then bind to the chief of this thread a fine tortuous linen thread, then bring the thread out in the needle, and in cutting the intestine, and bring it back at the rupture; and this method of stitching with sharp things is not as strong as along the course of the fetus and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no cure or medicine unless subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	I know that any wound or abscess, as soon as it heals, is called universally a "fistula", and more so when it has been lanced and drained.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And the fistula is according to the true definition a hard and white nodule, where there is no pain, and it is also lanced like the feather of an owl; and never completely clear bowels, and sometimes thick, sometimes thin; neither has it ever been seen, and on the other hand enough; and I have not spoken of the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no relief, this is only because of one of the VIII causes: namely, smallness of blood or cors; or for its wickedness; or because it has too much bowels inside, and on the lips, which does not allow the birth of bowels; or because there is too much bowels; or because the lees are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the cure; or because, that which is caused by a pestilence, or because the propriety in the region is late digestion, and slow sanctity, and escapes by nature; or because there are veins or osses: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula, which is done by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula may occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sinew, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes that it affects the principle limb, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of great difficulty in the cure, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the surface that I have mentioned, and you have promised to cure it, and you see it clearly, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, look at it; and if the fistula is twisted, look at it with a slender tent of lead, for the lead bends in accordance with its curvature; and if the fistula has broken hands, and you cannot cure it well with tents, then cauterize it according to what I have said, and oste the broken bones and corrupt tendrils that are inside; and then cure it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right place, then it is necessary that you cure it completely, as well as you can, then put wet tents in medicine water, and pour them out to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that is reserved at the bottom; and then put oilmens in wringing fresh oil, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this means, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cauterize it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If in the shoulder there is a hurt to the principal members, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackening, so long as the decay is all through the bone, then heal it with healing stuffs until it is whole; and if it is not whole, and it continuesbowed, as before, know that you have not gone far enough: if you discover and seek out until you are at the bottom, and take away all the decay, then restore the place; and if it is whole there, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too great that you cannot come to it; if there is no other problem than to let it heal naturally; and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out by the claws, if you extract it with the right tool for this, and if there are many bones, then pull them out, one by one; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut and moisture and heal it, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you do not remove them in an hour, then place something on the wound that will cause putrefaction, and let it be until the hairs rot around the bone, and then the bones will come loose more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, then wait so long for corruption until the blackness covers all the bone, then dress the wound; and if there is a great deal of corrosion and it comes up to the root of the bone; then make sure it is covered completely until the corrosion is gone, and then treat it until it is healed. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered the bone, so that the matter came to the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no apparent reason for opening it; but because of his folly, it opened so much that much matter came out, and became a fistula, and it came to such a point that all went away wet with water from the bone; and many times he was cured in two years, and there was no cure for it in the art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were used to cure it, and that which flowed through the openings had made the bone very red, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and I found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and put into one of the holes as much as I could discover a part of the bone, and I found it corrupted and perciet, and it came against corruption all the way inside; I knew what appeared to me of the bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption, besides that which I had; and I began to restore the wound with medicines in a long time, and I could not bind it; and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and I found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I knew it, and then I took it out, and I leaned over the hole; but I did not put as much into it as I could reach with a palm of the bone, and I set it back with medicines; and it was healed and bound firmly, and it came not again to open the wound for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death which I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car for the evacuation of blood often, but he was completely healed, and gave birth in the place of the bone a hard child, and was of good disposition and had no harm nor opposite from all in all, nor did it make noise nor come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the skull, it should be done in this way: take a string, and draw up to the head of the bone that has been opened, and order no one that he should extend it above; and put another string, more thick than the first, on the second, and stretch it over the cord that is under the bone, and uncover the cord on the place where you see or feel corruption, so that the cord does not burn the cord; and put a piece of wood or an open pot under the bone to cover the broken cord; and should be done as often as one can see and feel the corruption, and another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the jaw is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the whole jaw; then put on an axe, and then string from one part to another the corruption, and let the string be long enough for the corruption; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the joint that is corrupted, and string it with the other side; and if the corruption is in the extension of the two joints, then there will be no other injury except to cut off; and if the corruption is at the hand's grip or at the foot's grip, then it is very painful, but all the same you should inquire about that corrosion how it opens for you; and purify it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose themselves; and know that the incision and the strings to cover these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and littleness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to arrange each instrument according to its appearance; and know that the work will show you the instrument of which you have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; if you think about the instrument of which you have need according to what is suitable for him.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	dou feu
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, then bandage at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come any further; and if it comes to the arm, then bandage to the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and do this as soon as the corrosion appears or starts: if it comes at the first joint, then bandage after the other joint; and if it comes down, then bind all the way down; and if it ascends to the leg, then bandage at the knee joint; and if it comes up to the knee joint, then do not bind so tight that the patient feels pain, and let there be a space between the bandages so that the tissue is exposed; then bind or wrap, and put a linen cloth on each side of the bandage, so that the cloth does not touch the joint and come into contact with the corrosion, and cause the patient another wound or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the blood runs when you work, cauterize the place well, or put on some powder that restricts it; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it is healthy; and I will tell you what happened to the man at home in a little while: he got a blackness that seemed like fire burned, and that corrosion came first on his heel of the foot, so it ruined all the foot; and when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he covered it with copper, and was healed; and after a long time the corrosion returned to the heel of the hand, and came to me, and I put things that bruise after cleansing the flesh, and could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of making the matter work again; and I also doubted that if I should shape his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of man was weak; and he became very despairing, and returned to his country, and covered his hand with copper, and was healed; and I have heard only that people should do this or that, if they need it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu'il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc'a l'os, ne jusc'au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n'est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s'elle est si alongie qu'elle viegne jusc'a l'os em parfort, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s'aert mie por sa corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have vowed that the leather should be tough, and the corruption is not perfect, and the leather is thick like a chariot, so that the cure of the blister is as follows: look if her breasts are large, and the sweat that comes from it has an unpleasant odor, then apply Egyptian medicine made in this way: take honey, oil, and lime, evenly, and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and also thicker than honey; and then take according to your need, and form it into water and honey, and apply it to her chest, and squeeze out the fluid; leave the medicine there for two hours, then drain it by squeezing; make this many times until her breasts are completely white, and the sweat is gone; and never apply water of ashes when this medicine is present, but you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and pour water on them, then let it flow, and apply it, as long as you know that her breasts are well white; and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, if you apply water and honey, or some of it is made of lime, crushed; or you make it with honey and wine, that the honey has the property of whitening and washing, and wine makes the breast firm; and when you have done this, and you have vowed that her breasts are well whitened, if you apply this to her chest, and it is that the leather made from it comes into being, and is that you take plaster that is finished, and make it with oil of roses and in wine; or you apply some medicines and aromatics, whose properties I have mentioned in treating aromatics; and if the opening for the breast is small, and the catarrh from the blister cannot enter, if it is widened a little with iron, and put into a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, as long as it is widened; and if the wound is too wide, so that you leave it open to such an extent that the blister can enter, and if the opening that pours sweat is above, if the pot or lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bow is in perfect shape, do not allow it to slip; and if you cannot cover the breastbone as you see fit, assemble it in such a way that the bow runs down to the lowest point it can reach, for when the bow is in perfect shape, do not allow it to slip; and if you cannot cover the breastbone as you see fit, assemble it in such a way: that the bow runs轻松地向下，不留下任何bow;和采取 consolative药物放在胸上，并覆盖以lin布，完全覆盖胸；然后，在力所能及的地方加强胸部，因为在胸前开口的尺寸比第一个更大，所以将绷带缠绕在胸前打开的口上，以固定 bow，除非你每天多次；和谁在胸前开口上，经常检查是否有 bow，以及它是否有毒、少或足够，或者消化了，或者没有消化。注意患者是否有疼痛或不适，是否有脓或没有，以及药物是否已扩展到某种程度，你可以看到自然如何在胸前打开的口上生长；所以知道乳房已经开始移动，靠近患者；然后在早上，第三天，当你清洗伤口时，如果改变了绷带，就重新绑上绷带。
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his breasts get bloated after a lot of days, knowing that his breasts don't hurt.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons creep in slowly over time, but do not despair of health because health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some homes whose late-starting itch in their wounds, and those that do the opposite; and if breasts get bloated after a lot of days, knowing that they don't hurt; and if the breasts slow down, and are stretched out, so take medicines that dry up wet substance and become dry in virtue, like vinegar, for it is the final medicine, because there is a lot of vitriol, and that is the last medicine; take vinegar and dry it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with equal parts of wine; then use it; and this one makes better, when the dried vinegar isn't present.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toe of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Is it possible that you would like me to provide a translation of this text as well? I can do so, but please note that the original text is in a medieval language and may contain unique vocabulary or phrases that are not commonly used today.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the treatment section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off all the excess that is left of the nail, and then cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail is pushing out and starting to hurt, then you must cut off the tip of the nail that is pointing out, and shape it upwards, and carefully and lightly trim the remaining nail with burning and corrosive remedies to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, so wrap it, and treat it well, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the two corrupt, so wrap it as mentioned above, then treat it until it heals; and if it is injured, and bruised, and feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then wrap the nail of the spatumile in a twig across the top, and be careful that the cut does not come down to the toe which is off the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the joint of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two bones that grow in the hands of some men are sometimes flesh and sometimes bone, and there is no nail; and in no one of them does the birth occur at the root of the joint, or at the origin in some of them.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born with two legs and do not move, and those who are born at the joint of two legs, by chance may move; the size of a hairy one is light, in some way: cut it at its root with a wide chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint, to cure them is hard; if you hold them together.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born with a deviated leg, first cut the roundness up to the bone, then chop the bone with an appropriate chisel, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cover that which is joined together, so that the joint returns to its natural form; then place between two canvas or drapes wetted with oil of roses so that it does not join, or place between two thin pieces of linen, until the edges are joined, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the two come together with their palms, then join them as they should.
des vils	dour
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These are gross, wrapped up, full of excess melancholy, that come from the lower parts of the body; and more come in the legs of those who walk on their feet, work, and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should not administer any more purgings of the bowels, and then heal it from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure for iron is done according to two ways: one is that you cop them up, and then draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	For the cutting, it is according to this way: arise first the leg of the warm water very well, until the big blood is thin, then extract the leg of the sick from above the crotch up to the knee; then open the vein at its base, or in two or three places, with a wide cut, then draw out and draw out the black blood by your hand, from one head to another, as much as the virtue of the sick can bear; and then tie it up, and command that he be covered with meat, wearing black collyers; and restart the evacuation and treatment when the veins are clean, and wash the sick.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is seen twisted and twisted and wrapped together, and is not straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And if the shape of the iron with which you cover the vis is twisted, and does not split it, but covers the vein; and is of a thick form, for if it were thin, you would split the vein, but if it is thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this causes the skin to rot, as if it were crawling under the skin and between the skin and the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the onset of this disease are that an extremely large inflammation comes in the leg, then the joints change, and the vein begins to break forth, just as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the veins open, then you should wrap a piece of cloth around one and a half hands' length from the head [of the leg], and tie it, and leave the cloth wrapped around for as long as it takes for the swelling to go down; then untie it and cut it off, leaving nothing behind. For if you cover it over completely, it will turn into an abscess and putrefaction, and cause great disease; so it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the knuckle, and there is no remaining [swelling] after treatment. And this disease has happened to me five or six times when the veins were opened up to five hands' lengths, and when I cut them, they burst out [or broke open], and all the contents came out; and it was emptied, and medicine for putrefaction was applied every day, then that wound was treated just as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at no time to this vein hands rain, and least of all when it opens in the ankle of the foot, or where the foot is, and then it comes out of the breach, and from which it rains; so treat it if you will as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The worms that are born between leather and shield
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff disease", for it often occurs in buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and shield, and goes everywhere ascending and descending, and feels good at the sensation of one member to another, until it rips the skin where it went, and comes out; and is infected with pus, as if it were worms and scorpions and insects and scabies; and doubt is caused by its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the oil, by chance it enters and destroys the oil; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it and draw it out, only then can you do so: if therefore you lay the joint above and fasten it firmly, then lift it up and draw it out, and let it fall into the vessel in which you are working, and you will not find it unless you cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it spoils the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming to the head near the oil, then squeeze it out tightly, and then lift it up and draw it out. And it is necessary to use the patient's own corruption of medicines to dissolve the bad humors and sear with meat腐烂.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen the one that I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and saw a little swelling in the vein of her arm; and then suddenly, I felt it go up as high as a worm to her shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if it were alive and silver when it moved from its place; the pain left that place, and entered into her shoulder, and then a little while after, it corroded all over her body until it came to her other arm; then she told me that she was turning herself round in her bed, just as I had seen her do.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how she moved from member to member, for I have never heard of this disease in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I have often heard of people with this disease having pain move from one part to another, but I did not expect it to happen in this way, as it did in the woman; and I thought that perhaps her body was so constricted that the wind went up and down inside her, and because her veins were uncovered and her body damp.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see that this disease is cured and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we said, above and with care, and then cope up to so that those winds stop at their place; and cauterize that place; and if you do not see that wind in your hair, if you cure it with dirty pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	They are various, according to their appearances and according to the places where they come from.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and small, and curly, and soldered; and those that have two angles, and some that have tongues, and some that have pieces; and some that do not chore in any member at all, but chore according to two ways: first, in the principal members, as brain, liver, pancreas, stomach, kidneys, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she dies in any of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, get to know: if it is necessary that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after many preparations; and when this bad sign does not get to know you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the sign of the skull is that the arrow pierces the bone, and the medicine that lies on the skull, is when the scotomatous and sad and twisted and red eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it does not come from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and when the wound appears moist and white like blood, and looks like burnt charcoal; and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the cure, and pull out the arrow if it is stuck.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the sitter when she lies down is that she is near the left breast, and also because it feels like she is lying on something hard, not empty; and perhaps the sitter moves as much as a bird does, in short black breath, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: so that one can doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that has pierced the heart is that there is no foam of blood that jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he sighs heavily and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces the back, it is a delight to the little ribs; and there is great pain and sorrow and sighing; and all the members shake.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow pierces the stomach, perhaps there is nothing coming out of the wound from the digestion.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces the belly, and there is no end of it in the gut, then there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine flows out and runs away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is affected like this, the face, neck, throat, shoulder, jaw, back, and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not move, tell me if you have done something different.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow entered someone's neck at the root of their neck: I tried to extract it, and I pushed it from another side away from the fat of the ear, and was healed with no pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And tie a string around the arrow that lies in the fat of oil paper, and the string was tied up, and I could not achieve more than the tip towards the stalk, and the string was big like an arc-turquoise, all very light without ears; The game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I tied a string from the throat to a Christian, and the string was Arabic to ears; I knew the beards, and I waited until I tied it up, and the Christians were healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I tied a string to a man at home, which was a head or stomach, and I thought he was dying; and then after thirty days, if his condition did not improve, I cut the string, took it out, and tied it up again, and it did not cause any bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to see a man who has an arrow in his body or foot, and the wound is deeply set; then let the arrow stay inside, and do not disturb its natural course, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was deeply set; and thus he suffered great pain; and many more such things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I healed a king's son who had an arrow in his neck, and the arrow was deeply lodged; it hung slightly to one side; and the arrow was all bloodied. I was called to heal after that which had been shot three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	And I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I left it there for a whole night, and I felt nothing; but he felt stinging and pain on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was the point of the arrow I put on top of the plaster with the atractive and digestive, so that the leeches do not inflame; and I saw the leeches of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put on the plaster at once, and resolved the wound immediately, and delayed it for a long time so that he felt the arrow inside his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the corrosive water medicine at once, until it was opened, and tried it out, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened to its place; then I inserted it into the opening of the wound with that medicine until the shape of the head of the arrow came out clearly; and three months later, then the wound spread so much that I had to pull out the pliers from one side and another, and could not remove it; so then I kept on trying and devising ways of instruments, until I got one with a nice form, so that I removed it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage from the nose cannot be healed; so I healed it, and the wound was sewed up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Have you explained the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your cure on this which I have not said, because the liber is unable to do everything; but the master surgeons compare on a very small thing, and on those who are present and fail, try nine or ten operation, and nine or ten instrument, for the dissection of foreign things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are in the members or they are stuck unless according to two ways: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which jumps out is a running arrow in their bones, and never is at any time stuck now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not bend now, let it remain so that the bones are rotten inside, and the outlet is open; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, so leave it for a certain number of days, and every day it bends; and then it bends, and if it does not bend, so pierce all the small veins around until the blood comes out, and then cut.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the neck bone and goes to one of the head's vertebrae, and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it so that it remains even after a few days, because if the arrow comes out to the skin, death is certain.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and not out to the skin, and stays there for a few days without any bad accidents, then use the pulling device.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is completely stuck in there and cannot be removed, then administer tar and wormwood, as I told you; then treat the joint until it is well.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the neck so that it cannot be seen, look for it with great care; and if you feel it, treat it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot treat it because of the wound and the depth of the arrow, cut off as much as possible of the flesh and skin around the arrow; and carefully break or bend the arrow so that it comes out whole; and take great care not to break the arrow when you pull it out, so that you hurt yourself more.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, let the joint where the arrow is embedded rot; then treat it, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the pain that has been caused runs contrary to this, then administer what we have said about the cure in his chaplet; and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put not on a perilous way how you draw out the arrow, soon or late, firmly or loudly; and place the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow entered him, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	And if the arrow that comes from another place does not strike anything of him, or if the wound is swollen in a certain place so that it can be seen or felt at all: then cut up until the pliers can take hold of it, and then extract it: for it would be a waste to do so now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly until it enters into the bone and widen the bone, and then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be released, let it be left for now, and then begin the extraction again as long as it is still being extracted; and if it is a arrow, then pour all of it into the instrument; and if it is wedged, and you see the tip, administer an ointment, if it is administered with an instrument that is sharp, so that the tip of the arrow enters the instrument's handle; and then pour it out, and if the arrow has been cut, then pour the instrument to the tip entering into the handle in order to rejoice in the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, then you must cut all the tissue around where the poison is located, if you can, and then treat the wound as it is necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow has gone into the chest or pelvis or bladder or ribs, and it is close by, then you must cover it over, if you can; and be careful not to cover the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, if need be; and treat it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the claws used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and it should be shaped like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they are in many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pin used to fix the point of an arrow is also like the feathers of an owl, to fix the point of the arrow, as it is shaped like this:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the claws for fixing and for holding, if it is shaped like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the neck common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins from which one is cured are XXXI, of which there is a chief of XVI, that is to say: II batons which are after the ears, which are called the "two herbech"; and the II arteres which are in II temples apparent; and an artery which is in II fists of II eels, which are called "aspires"; and the artery which is at the top of the forehead; and the artery which is in the chief of the neck; and the two veins which are at the base of the throat; and the two veins which run over the lips above the mouth, these are called "augerich"; and an artery which is between the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly spoken of are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and lies along the left side, and is called by lay people "vein of the head"; its opening is called "fast" and consists of the cephalic and basilic, and is called by lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic lies on the right side, and is called by lay people "vein of the belly", and lies over the fistula, and is that which is spoken of, which opens clearly on the knuckle.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the small vein is that which lies between the index and middle fingers, and so on to twelve; and in the leg, there are three veins: one lies along the fistula of the left side, and the second runs from the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nerve", which lies in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins running like those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The sinews of the two arteries that are in the two temples, so that they cause old-age trembling, and constant giddiness, and habitually cause tears to flow into the eyes; and the quality of the sinew is such as I have said: it is that the patient should stretch his neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feel the little pole under your two fingers, then sign of the cross on the top of your second finger, and bottle up the saliva from above your two index fingers, and lift the vein up, and the cup, as you did in the two other veins, and make it flow with blood according to your need; then let go of the patient, and put your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top; then let the wound heal, and we have already spoken about their wrapping and extraction, or beginning from the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The head pain of the forehead is as great as the headache of the skull due to ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and bright lights; and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears, then take the instrument called a "fosseur", which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and tighten it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount that you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not good that the flame should be too hot; and the vein is sliced across, for the bone is close by, and the flame might break out when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The veins of the two arms that are in two places help with swelling, and with leprosy, and with bright lights, and with oil in the ear, and with ancient diseases of the face; and the quality of their vein-cutting is that the patient twists his neck without a loop, as above; then cut it, and a little of the long flame, a little large, for there is no thread.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is a thin fire, by chance let it break; then make run the blood as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the blood from the vein is thin, by chance let it break; then make run the blood as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and bind it well. The blood from a new birth is often thick, and suddenly stops, and from facial diseases, such as migraines and rashes that come on the face, indeed even when they are old; and the quality of the blood so that the patient strangles his throat, then strangle his birth in your left hand, and put the thin fire long, and put it in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and now will begin to run; and don't move it too much with precision, and make run the blood according to your need, then tie it for a night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
de la sainie des leivres	about the health of animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	about the health of teeth and gums
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this health is to have the patient sit before you and strain his neck as I said; then turn the tongue, and look at the veins, which are on the right side of the tongue and on the left, and they know by this that they are black, and by this that there is entor in them, small veins: so take one and the largest of each, and also do the same to the two veins that are above and below, because it is a middle way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	about the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	about the health of the throat and tongue and diseases of the mouth; And the quality of the doctor is that the patient chokes between your hands in front of the sun, and holds up the tongue, and looks at each side, a black vein: so take one and the other, and do not over-straint it, for the veins are above.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly treated are treated in two ways: either by poking deeply into the flame of fire, or by applying an olive oil paste to them; and they are called 'anhesil'; and they are large and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is deep, so it is named, and it is large as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are flat and full of thick blood, and that contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the shape of the olive oil flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicate to point, and it is used to treat thin veins, where there is a yellow thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment for a basilicus vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases of the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is appropriate for the healer to treat it thoroughly and to bind the artery that is involved.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he copes the earth, and a fever comes up, if it is necessary to stop it, as I said; and it should not be grasped with fire, but cut off like sheep.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the bazile doesn't open obviously, if it is necessary to extract it and change another one; or you want any rain from it, or you heal in its place the vein that goes into the arm: it opens obviously; and copes with fire anesil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the place of the wound, it is necessary to extract the arm so that you touch the place until you recognize the hair; then mark the spot with a stick, and then take the arm, and cope the vein with fire anesil; and guard against hurting in the earth when you see the place infected, for it is from the earth: therefore be careful.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it come out at the top as urine from a child, and his blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: then hurry and put your ear on long, and then remove your ear because it often comes out; and put your hand over it, and let it be, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move him until he is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood does not come out, and it comes out, and the medicine is not applied to him, if the artery opens, for the head of the shoulder re-enters; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fir tree bark and rub it well until the other half is ready; if the blood stops, it is good; but if not, take the powder that stops the blood, as we have said, in various combinations for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfant, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtilitat, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And the patient should approach the head, and help with the hairs; and it is better to cut with the olive flame or the marten flame, for it is the safest of all veins, because it does not involve the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter course, and do not trouble yourself if the first time it fails, and start again; and by chance the joints swell in some men, when they fail the first time, but they do not trouble themselves.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about health care is that healthcare should only be sought to maintain health and prevent future diseases; and it should be done in one of the three veins: namely, the head, the chest, and the abdomen; and it must be done at the beginning of prayer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it must be done on the first day or the third day after every two hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Healthcare that prevents diseases does not have a specific time determined, but rather should be done at any hour or moment; and it is not necessary to take care of children before they are twelve years old and women except for the fourth month up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They must not save the old people who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	They must not save the old people who have passed sixty years. When someone is to be saved, in whatever way it is possible that he should not break the intestines of a light clister, if he has held back the wind, so that the intestines do not attract the superfluous pus that injures the main members; nor must he be saved if he is too soured by meat, or if he is yvring (pregnant), as much as it is possible, nor if he is drooping, and if he has had a passion of colic, vomiting, and cramping of the belly, and frequent lying with a woman, and travail, and staying up late, and this and that, or by something in the arms or heart; then subtilely the humors, let him be fat, by meat, drink, and medicine, if he can benefit from it; then go into or bathe, if nothing helps to soothe his pain, and save him from the vein at the pit of the stomach, as we have said; and keep him away from work, and hunger, and lust, and similar things; and be careful and join, and let him who is to be saved be higher than those whom one saves, and rub his arms twice or three times, then draw the tendon above moderately, because when it is too stiff or weak, he cannot bend it; and then rub the savior with his right hand at the vein where he is to be saved, a little or a lot, that the vein does not burst and bleed; then moisten the savior with flame from a small bit of old oil, and put his thumb of his left hand on the vein where he is to be saved, so that the vein may not burst and bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventosité, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if it opens the vein for the first time, it is good; and if not, then it begins again a little bit more of that way or another in which the veins are inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are inflamed and the patient hopes for it, let him rest a day or two, and do not bind his arm: perhaps he will get pus; don't enter or bathe, then begin again the treatment if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the cut subtilely, and you doubt that it won't come out as much pain as you see, so firmly in that wound itself to the whole flame properly; and work a little hospital, so that the veins are inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the veins inflamed, do not begin again the treatment, and put a little oil thereon, for it soothes the body of the pain, and is gentle in that place where the oil lies; and so administer the oil to each wound as you treat the veins to stop the flow of blood; and he himself makes триace and boils when he puts it on the vein; if subtilely, then split it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if it comes out an abscess thick, which happens many times, least it is only after this time or the opening of the vein is small, then you hurry and put on the spot a sponge wet with water and in silk a little hot, and hold for an hour; and it is that you do this after the exit of the blood from the vein, and if it stays in place after some days no black or green, so it does not harm him; and if you see it, put on any thing of aloe or mirrremade with calamen's juice, tar, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance when the basilic is removed: then put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, this is bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting on any of what we have said, for perhaps in the heart without the artery; but make it dry with plaster to harden the place, then heal with other healing, until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each pain according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the pain is black, let it run until it is red; and if you see too much, let it run until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for him who has a sore and is out of the way, and needs bloodletting, that he make a larger wound and let the flames be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and heal him little by little, and let him heal across, not through piercing; and this mode of healing is saved from bloodletting and nerve injury, and it is better than long healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him who has a hot pulse, it is fitting to give moist juice from pomegranate juice; if he is heated, give pain three or four times; And if he has a cold complexion, before the healing, give moist juice in honey syrup, or in aromatic syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cumin, and sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he sweats in the sickness, after the flow of blood, it is necessary that he smell brew from char, and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up blood sometimes, and feels faint at other times, when he is weakened by great sickness, that he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits up blood after the first fainting, and has a strong pulse, if he be healed in seven hours after the first fainting, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who faints elsewhere, if he must heal him two days or three.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has blood within his body which warms him, and brings on a fever; if then you extract great quantities, and widen the artery so much that it utters a cry, then, having put together all the conditions of healing, place your hand upon his pulse when he is healed, that death does not come into the artery, and this happening many times, when the healing is neglected; and do not consider whether you dislodge the arm firmly or not, for it would be wrong; but leave it until he heals the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame so long as the blood which has congealed at the artery's end comes out, and put upon it a little rope dipped in water, and press it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, leave it alone and do not squeeze it, as long as the abscess is calm.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that goes into the arm is cut at the base of the arm because it is composed of many veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of this incision is that the patient holds his hand in hot water until the color turns red; then let it cool down a little, so that the vein appears well, and then incise across it, not wide nor long; and if it is too large, incision near the joint of the hand, and do not take it out, but put the hand again in hot water, and leave the blood to run in the water, as long as you have enough; and if it is in esteit, do not reboudre the hand again in hot water, for we put it more in peril than in esteit; and the incision of this vein is more saved from all other veins, than there is no artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for the right hand's salutation is for all liver ailments, and this is how it is done: draw out the hand, and dip it in warm water until the vein disappears, if one can see it; then cut it across, and chop it completely, so that nothing hurts anything; and do not chop too much finely, lest the nerves be completely exposed, and then put the hand back into the warm water, unless it has become frozen in the wound, and cannot be taken out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have finished treating the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and silk over it to join it firmly together, and do this for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for the left hand is good for mouse disease, and do all the same as I told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The disease of the sore is good for all diseases that are in the body; such as diseases of the mares, and retentive flowers, and diseases of the reins, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of this medicine is that the patient should pour some hot water on it, and rub the vein as long as it hurts, and lie down on top of the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and goes up the foot with much rain; heal the wound or more large rain, or at the ankle, that it may be cured.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, you must guard against the cold which is in the ground, and heal it in the same way as when you are walking; and let the fire go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he can't get out of it, put the foot in water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the surgery needs to be done for the first time, then begin again on top of it a little bit later, because the blood is salty; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the same incision on the other leg evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The blood of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and the surgery to relieve the pain in the hip is when it is for sciatica.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this surgery is that the patient goes in or out of the water, and draws it out from under the ankle with four twists, because otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then do all the cuts in all ways that you can, and cross them; and make sure to chop it off, for its blood is up, and it has been very well refilled by many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't open it, so that the blood does not flow out of the foot and towards the small toe, and keep away from the nerves; and make the wound bleed a little, and then pull the leg off, and put cotton on it and tie it up; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	The suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or of horn, or of glass; and suction is done according to two manners: either by piercing and drawing blood, or not piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	The suction that is without piercing is made in XIIII ways of the body: one at the top of the head; and another around the neck; and another II sides of the neck; and another under the chin; and another on the shoulders; and another on the arms; and another on the legs; and another on the feet; and this suction does not deal with blood except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this reason it is not useful, unless it be made at all times or without heat in any disease that comes from overindulgence, as long as the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it happens, or because of customs, we should ventilate each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and milm and in each decade; for there are such ones who, when they need to ventilate, have a heavy head; and those who truevent repletion and rudeness on their face, and on their head, and at the throat, and darkness in their eyes; and such ones who truevent a drop of blood from their mouth, and have escaped the tongue, and thirst for blood; and if there are such ones who think and see through not having eaten blood and Navert and Death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and more so when it is the middle of the month, we order them to ventilate after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The surgeon of the head if it helps with the headache of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and does not come except after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in the place of the surgery of the head, and does not come except for those of a cold complexion who are used to it or who have a fever, because this does them great harm; and for that one does not come except at night when sleeping, nor who has a cold head disease.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become confused, and for this reason a suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And the suction should be applied to the neck at the level of the recovery of the head and of the basin, and for this reason it should be placed a little higher than the place where the recovery occurs, that is to say at the level of the throat and of the windpipe, and also at the level of the stomach, and a little below; and it should be pushed in slowly, because if it is pushed too hard, confusion or indigestion may occur.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And the suction should be applied to the costlets of the neck if it causes pain in the head, and blurring of vision and dizziness, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and at the level of the recovery of the basin; and you must instruct the patient that he press his hand firmly but not too much so as not to cut off the blood from the artery, and not to cause any pain.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The winds of the mouth cause disease in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is at the level of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the shoulders cause as much pain as three veins in the arms, since they drain blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient that he not too tightly bound, for his skin is thin for the saddle, and it hurts to press and the arteries are visible.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The wind that is on the back is worth as many emissions from the fundament, and similar diseases, and it is necessary that the wind be large, and of air, for it has the task of well milking; and perhaps, if it were too subtle, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventuses of the legs if they are opened wide, for they draw blood from all the body, and equal the old pains of the back, and of the knees, and of the bladder, and remove flowers; and are in place of the two sophes, and of the two ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring death in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put on the suction cups is that you should first put them on, and suck quickly, and then place them securely, and move them evenly, and do not stop doing this as long as you see the red and inflamed spot, and feel the pain of blood; then tighten, and remove the cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are some who have a very tight chest, and clear pores: it is then necessary to make a large wound, and once cut, and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is outside the body is large, so that consider to wound twice: the first time for subtlety open the way blood thick.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very heavy outside, so that consider to wound the third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, if we persist only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to extract blood, let us begin often; and if the outside is heavy, so that finish firmly, and the end is that the wound be perceived suddenly, and consider a man who has thick and hard skin, and who suffers it, that you oil the leas of the suction cups with oil to open and dissolve: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or soft almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or lilac, or chamomile, or other.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is too much fluid, thick and cold, take oil of almonds, or of balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person has a fever and is sweating, there is no need to put oil on, but it needs to be washed after the perspiration of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or something else.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if someone has too much moisture, if he rises up with it, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And if someone has a lot of thick fluid, they should rise up with old wine, or water of oak, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not good to bathe before the wind or after bathing, but an hour or two after; and one should not sleep after perspiration, but when he needs to, when he has been perspiring.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard against those who are coleric, and their heat is too acute and inflamed; let him drink cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar foods; and eat small amounts of meat, and roast pork, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and small amounts of water, and small amounts of meat, and roast poultry and fowl; and on the day when he breathes wind, he must drink more than eat; and sometimes give certain men triple or musk before or after wind to strengthen the main members; and make the heat subtle, but it only helps those who are warm.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that do not hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the side, and podagra, and on the belly and kidneys and ribs and hip; because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the joints, and it is done only so as to attract blood from one member to another, just as we put cups on the breasts when we do not feel well; in order to remove the viscous substance that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and kidneys to reduce the member; and so it removes pain, if there is an operation or a stone, it removes it by its attractive virtue, perhaps the operation or the stone has been moved from its place; and they are never filled together, and never filled with plain water, as in the disease of pleurisy, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or water in which herbs have been cooked suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus: It should be two hands wide and half a palm in diameter, and it should have a small hole in the center as if for a pin, as for wrapping an needle, and let it be of brass, so that it does not cut the patient when applied to the member; and in the middle it should have a cross bar of brass or iron, for holding a grip, and they should be great or small according to the disease and the age of those who take them; because the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and of thin ones are other than those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should put this suction cup on the member: take the grip of wax or linen, and place it in front of the suction cup across the cross bar, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the member, and these two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one presses, the vapor comes out, and take off the suction cup; and take the grip again as before, and renew it often, if you need to do so.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the chest tubings that are used in pleurisy, there is no tube or hole, and it is only used when there is water, placed on the limb with great caution; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	The chest tubings that are used in pleurisy have no tube or hole, and they are only used when there is water; put them on the limb with great care; and this is the form: Do not use them in members where you cannot place tubings because of their smallness, like lips and gums, and similar things; and in the bare skin of horses, if there are two or no hair, and others that look like them; and the quality of using them is that when you find tubings that are in sweet water without danger, take them; put them into water that is sweet, as long as they are comfortable, and have nothing in their bladders; and then clean the wound with a swab and put the tubing on; and when they become clear, and dry up, if it is possible to place a tube there, do so, for this is better afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, raise the level of this, and then of water very well, and then squeeze it; and if the levels are too far from the center of the veins, wet a linen drape in cold water, and put it on, until the veins are stopped; and if there are many veins, put crushed vitriolic stones or gall, and similar things, until they are stopped; or you can put half peeled peas on the level, and leave them to burn at the level, and now they will stop; and if you need more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the veins do not want to take it, rub the level with fresh blood, or insert an needle into it so that the vein comes out, and then put it on, and sometimes when they feel the blood, they will burn; and when you see that they are bleeding, powder a little aloe and seared hay, or ash, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the translation of the provided text:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapters on this topic are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are beneficial for dislocations and joint pains.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, oh learned one, that the wise men have never poured this substance onto themselves from ancient books or letters; and because of this, knowledge of it has been lost in our land, for I have never found any good book on it; and I know nothing about it except what can be learned from the study of ancient books, or from experience, or through custom in my life. I have described here, in this chapter, what is contained within this substance, and I have summarized it at the end; and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is appropriate that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on the truth, so that those who are tested can learn and understand this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when rupture or dislocation or twists or dislocates comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hasten to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing else hinders you, as weakness of the corset, or entangling, or old people; or if his shoes are not very good, or too often; and have mild cold drinks, that is to say, cold jousts, and horseflesh and cheveline, and do not drink wine, or have any greasy drinks, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt about a hot apothema, or an expansion of matter in the member; if the sick person returns to his first governance that he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is fitting that the sick person be nourished with meat that makes good healing, or he has viscousness, as well as baked wheat in water, and rice, and beans, and pie, and cow's milk, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For if one delays too long, then one will soon have a fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot well heal or hardens together by nature because of the seclusion of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, as children's bones; but there is remedy in this: when a bone is broken on one side with large pieces of flesh, which are joined to the limb, we must put them back together again so that they mend firmly; and no more of their work, and because it is necessary for such ones to have thick meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks are many and various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break at the top of the head is other than the break at the foot of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes with the sawing, and another when it is sharpened, as the blade of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if a break is with a wound, and a break makes a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each way has its tool, and its own instrument in the repair, as soon as the memory comes back to its place; and is known the break of the bone by that it is twisted, and open well from one side, and presses on the hand; and when there is no twisting or bend in the neck, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no fracture, but he may well have a twist, or a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not move it with the hand, but put medicines on it that come later, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in the armpit, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to put them in point of equality, so as the chest and i come viegne; and if the chest is hard, let him leave no day, as long as the chest is calmed down; then he puts equal to the mues that you can lightly and safely, and know that the recovery of him is more easy than the recovery of him who has pieces; then he forces it, as it should be.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces, and the extension of the two parts is hand or foot, or at your hand is a small member, or II strings, or a string and at your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are set aside, you remove by all means the additions in their places at the mues that you can, and keep that by your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient; and well join the two bones of the osses according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel the pulse well in your hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if the pulse is nice, and do not pull it too much, press so as those who make come from their overwork abscess hot and contracted member, as we have tried many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, instruct the patient that he not move it, watching or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and guard well that the member be so secure that it feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, it is not in place, and the need to put it in such a way that there is no pain; and guard well that it be put correctly, so that there is no tortuosity when he is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car il y a petits membres, si comme bras et doigt et semblant: si convenait envelopper drapeaux de lin mou et subtile; et ceux qui sont gros, si comme cuisse et jambe: si convenait envelopper d'un liien large et dur, car les liiens larges embrassent tout le grand membre, et l'entraignent de toutes parts uniformément, si qu'il n'y a nul trou; puis le tiens entoure légèrement, III tours ou IIII selon le membre, et étire ta main un peu à tout le liien, puis va au dessus de la rupture et l'entraigne moins, que la rupture puis éloigne un peu la rupture; et adoucis le liien un peu et un peu, tant que tu appuis fort partie du lieu sain, puis reprends autre liien, et retourne entoure très-fort sur le lieu brisé; puis reviens à la partie désordonnée de la rupture, et l'entraigne modérément, ne ni trop fort ni trop mollement, si comme nous avons dit en la première lieure au dessus; puis met entre les liens enveloppés de lin ou de drapeaux, tant qu'il soit tout égal, puis le tout par-dessus le bandage, et puis met tes étapes bien faites, s'il n'y a pas d'abdication ou d'enflure.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or an swelling, if you place something soothing on the abscess, and let it sit for a few days; then draw up on your thumbs, and be half of a thumb's breadth away from the abscess, either with a piece of leather used to make cleats, or with palmyra stalks, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And if there is a fracture or a break, if you place something soothing on the fracture, and let it sit for a few days; then draw up on your thumbs, and be half of a thumb' breadth away from the fracture, either with a piece of leather used to make cleats, or with palmyra stalks, and be according to this figure: But it is necessary that the thumb that you put on the break be a little thicker and wider than the others; and be also as far away as necessary from the limb's smallness or greatness; then draw up on the thumbs just as you did at first time, and tie with a thread going forward, as in the first time on the break; tighter is better, but not too tight, and the thread should be of linen; because if the thread is thick, like the cords they make for ligatures which are twisted linen, that is a great mistake, because the fracture cannot be equal if it is too tight, and it only needs to have between each thumb half an inch of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the chaps of the stars after extraction in his healthy places, then put those scales of linen or another rag so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the rupture and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not seem right to extract stars from all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it does not seem right to put stars on them before five or seven days, or more according to the necessity of the abscess; and follow here the method of the ancient plasters for restoring rupture, dislocation, and torsion: and that is that you take flour that stays on the walls of the mill, and confound it with a lot of egg, and put this conflation, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common way of the plasterer restoring the rupture to many conditions, and most often to women and small children, for it is not too sharp nor too hard.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering for healing breaks, dislocations and twists: take myrrh and aloes, Z Z.; asphaltum and mastic, X X.; aconite, VIIII Z.; and make them into a powder, and blend them with sheep's wool; the mixture of the flesh is warm, so use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly heals broken bones, and is good for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plastering for healing twists: take myrrh and aloes, Z Z.; masticum and asphaltum, X X.; aconite, VIIII Z.; well grind, and confect with sharp or sheep' s wool; and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of plastering for dislocated joints and broken bones to soothe the pain immediately, and use the bone size, and break up: take a new one, and soften it with water and cooked oil, and put on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	It is not good for the emollients to return, but it is good to properly soothe the abscess, and properly ease the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make an ointment that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-owl leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for healing bone breaks and soothing the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of vetches, each of them one part; and grind, and confound with wine, and the member is warmed up, and the confound with water of coriander or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make an ointment that works better than the first when the abscess is persistent and comes back after healing the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of wormwood, and of flax, of mulleins, and of marjoram, and of violets, and of chamomile, each one or part thereof; and grind them up, and make into a paste with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ipecras states that we should not put anything on a broken member to restore it but only wax and oil made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that we should put on a broken member things dry, a little warm, such as mirr, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plasters that are good for lesions and pain: take wool and feathers of the same size, or hair of a goat, and of wormwood, and of grass, and of mulleins, and grind them up, and make into a plaster, and put it on the member.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then take care not to let the patient feel any pain, nor have his bone move out of place; but if pain comes to its place, or itching, or no rest or swelling, hurry and set it free, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge moist with seawater, and dip into the water, and raise up his part, until the itching stops, and the pain is calmed; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry, wet with water or oil and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm; and let the inflammation of the member be healed, and the pain be gone, then begin again to apply the poultice, and a little of the plaster, and do not twist it so hard as before; and keep it subtile until it is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need to apply poultices and bind it up, if it begins again, as you did for the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb at all of what we have said, and it is not released until after three days or four or five or seven; and never leaves it for XX days, according to what one sees, as long as the break-up approaches the shoulder socket; then hold back more than before, and let the meat fatten, if I have said before; and if you see that it is drying out more than it is necessary to do so, arise then with hot water every time you release it, and let it be for each third day, and let it drip a little of the hour; by this work then cut off the rest at the limb, and carefully fix what has been broken: it is bad, and if it is painful and fearful ovraiges, and I do not see anything else but to slow down and do it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways to break the bone
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways to break a bone, and there are various shapes of fractures, and the causes are distinct; for there is a fracture that is done by the impact of an arrow or spear, which breaks all the bone up to where it becomes one with the flesh, as when it happens in the heel or foot; and this is what is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or an arrow can break the bone from above by piercing it, and this is called "absolute" fracture; and there is a wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if it is by impact from within, or by splitting or breaking the bone from the collarbone of stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it is a perforating fracture that approaches up to the skin which is attached to the bone, or that lies on the bone, and this is the wound, great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that is located in the bone is as thin as a lock of hair, and the cut is small, so this break is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by a stone, or by a fall, or by a similar thing, and it causes a piece of bone to enter; and if the head of the lock is located as a blacksmith does when he works on a lock.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if there is much moisture at the base of the lock where the bone is located, so it is like the head of a child; and all these kinds of breaks are pieces of small size as they are made in locks; and I will speak about this place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of breaks by the traction on them, and the inquiry at tents, and by the corrupt cart which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by the fact that when one exposes the bone, and rubs it over, thus opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, be careful of possible accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, palmsiness, feverish ague, and the hairs stand on end, and others similar appearances in many conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a promising accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the rupture comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone within the fourteen days since it happened.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then you must remove the bone within the seven days since it happened, so that the tissue decay not, and the accident mentioned above comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break in the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the brain, you should split the broken part here: and it is that you press the head of the sick person, and cover it over the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more easily than you can, and if the break in the blood comes to uncover the bone, or abscesses, help him with whatever is necessary, and it is that you fill the place of the membrane wet with oil of roses; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calmed, and be sure of the breaking of the blood; then begin to split the bone, and this is done in two ways: one way is that you split the narrow end in front, and this is its form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I bottle another length, larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have many different-sized nails, some are short and others are long, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and in doing so lightly, do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you drill through it lightly, so that the nails go in at an angle so that they do not cut through the end of the bone, and must have a point or circle above it, so as not to let the point pass through the bone; and you will need more, so that each comes in at its own place in relation to the end of the bone, so that you have nails for all the test; and this is the shape of the three ways of making nails:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for drilling into bone is that you place the nail on top of the bone and twist it until you feel that the bone has been drilled through; then put the nail somewhere else a little apart, and so do all around, then cut off the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take out the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools that you have, such as pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if you see that you have left the ardour of the bone which is delayed by the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tenuous and more delicate than the other incisor; and if it does not remain nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is lightly on the tools; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working which is that which Galen says, and it is more effective; and press it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens; so that when you have discovered this part, you shall place at its head the end of this lens-shaped incisor, from which it gets its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and is the part in two sides, so that the cutting is next to the bone; then proud of a small hammer above, so that you lightly hit the bone all around, and you give yourself well in guard of the membrane that is desoz; if it comes to the bone, so hit the bone lightly, for the bone well hurts without benefit, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break of the bone does not pierce just to the membrane, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover again that roughness, and shave the scales with a fine razor of which you must have different quantities, to administer in each one the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have before great razors, and after more subtle, and do not cease to do so until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair treatments and fine incisions, you must bring the patient in accordance with their condition; and this is something that has not yet been answered by those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the patient is unconscious, then you should wrap them in a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth, doubled over II or III times, and moisten it with wine and oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so as not to hurt the patient, and then tie it up, and do not remove it until the pustules have dried out a little; and leave it like that for one or two days, until the abscesses have calmed down, then remove it, and administer medicines in powder form, such as roots and flour of times and incense powder and aromatology and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it again with medicine that does not sting; and guard against the wound becoming dirty, so you do not leave it to assemble bowels, for when bowels assemble over the silk of the skull, if they corrode and burn, they bring great harm to the patient; because when you put something sharp on the wound, it stings from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Take heed, then, that no bad accident should come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt. And if black dung only comes because of the medicine that has been put on, which has its virtue, let you take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix it with one cloth, and put it on the wound; then let you cure in a way that seems right to you until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts of the neck above are not broken by one blow, for they are two bones; and this bone is cartilage, and does not break unless it is pushed or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should pound your little finger or a part of the neck, and fit it back into its place with equal force at your index finger, and at the knuckle by turning, until the neck returns to its natural shape; and do this gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and can't get back to its place, if you believe that you should put it equal to the top of a small ray.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, do this other way, and hurry to restore it the first day you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess has calmed down, then put a piece of linen cloth at the top of the neck where the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you put another one from the other side if there is a break; and let the cloths be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that it must not be dried out; let each one be moistened every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I don't think that's good; but it seems to me that they must be moistened in the preparation of alum and powder of mallow; then leave the cloth, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put peacock feathers in the tent, and if there is a drape around it, hold the broken one, and breathe ill on them; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes while you are operating, so that cotton wet with oil or a little patch of cotton is applied, or a patch of patch is applied;
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, so that a paste is applied from afar, of flour and sisament, and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk, then put it on light wraps, and do not tie the penis; and if the rupture of the penis is small, and it is broken into small pieces, so extract them with suitable tools, then cut it, and cure things that damage char, and suddenly, as if pastes and oils are suitable for him; and if there is no wound inside the penis, so cure the tent, and put plasters of cloth, until he is well.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the fracture is not too severe, and it is not broken in two, except that it is bent inside, then we shall treat it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, put your little finger in the mouth of the patient from your right hand; and if the fracture is on the left side, put your little finger from your left hand inside, lightly turning it, and treat it with the other hand from outside, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is on the right, then we must bring it together from both sides, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement begins from within, or there is a rupture, then we shall stretch it with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and then put a cloth over the broken jaw, and over it a double sheet; and over the sheet we shall put a big well-made strap, or a piece of leather that matches the jaw in length and width, and fasten it to the mandible with knots, and order the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, then let it rest for three days, and then put back what has been changed; and put plaster on, of the powder from the mill with much ash or flour of sisor, after having taken off the cerote; and put on the other lighter plaster, and if the plasters have stuck to each other, and the disposition of the sick person does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; often it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come out, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not remove any piece of bone; if the bone is slightly broken, use appropriate tools for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, then widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is deep, put on it some plaster suitable for this, to dry up quickly, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	Forcibly
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	And so break it forcefully several times before the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And so the work is done if the break is without an injury, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder joint that is broken forcefully; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or twist.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have the skill to do more, then put a round spear of cloth or another fabric on the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and hold it firmly, and pull the spear toward your hand, so that you place the break evenly, as is right.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the spear away from the patient's side in one go, so that it comes out completely, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and put the shoulder out of joint with a small movement, and pull the minister's shoulder up, until the bone of the spear comes out.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on both sides, and if you find it difficult to split it, it is necessary that you split it with a saw; and draw the pieces lightly apart, and if the bone cannot be joined again because of any obstruction, put away that instrument, but take care not to hurt yourself.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	et semble une cuiller, et n'est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l'os et la possance de l'uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d'aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si employe la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	and seems like a spoon, and is not hair, and is also as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and it has two joints, as you see, and one is wider and the other narrower, just as you have made the break in the bone when you treated it; and when you are sure that the abscess is hot, if it is hot, and the break is small, or if you doubt about the heat of the abscess, use a cloth and a tent, according to its quantity.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The dislocation of the bone, when there are wounds and bruises, is that you put plaster on the bone from the powder of the mill and ash of eggshells, and put light stumbles on it, and put a spike desos the joint, if you need one; then take a very thick bandage of a palm wide, then put double drapings over the stumbles, and plaster them; then take a thin stake three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the stake on the splint, and turn the bandage back over the neck, and desos the joint with care, and desos the joint with the disease; and take off from each part, and when you see that the time holds the splint forward, and you clearly see that the stake does not move away from the bone broken, then reward everyone every day, and when the bonds relax, if the restraint; and make the sick person walk on his back, and put him so that he sleeps with a little side of the joint desos, to lift the shoulder higher; thus lightens the fracture by the alignment of the shoulder, or you hold the arm to the neck, and do not let the accident come bad if it is not needed for XX days; then begin to plaster again if you see that it needs, and hold it and leave it until it is restored; and it is restored in the most in XXVIII days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English: 
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone comes forward, and there is no pain with it, then cut on top, and the bone, and do as we said in the breaking of the forceps to calm an abscess without pain.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the break of the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The piece is never broken in the middle, but it happens sometimes at the end; but it often breaks at the tip.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the joint, and causes the patient great pain, and there is no relief, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and he feels it all well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and gently make it even in all ways as much as possible so that the shape of the bone is like this; then put it in bandages and wrap it around the bone with a soft cloth, or salt, or any lighter thing, and tie it firmly. And turn it round to the back, and tighten it, and loosen it every hour, and if it becomes loose, loosen it again, and if it comes into place by corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, hurry to loosen it, and remove the bandage, and apply the cure in this way; then remove the bandage, and tighten it until it is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the rupture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the rupture of the ribs does not come from the outside but from within, and it comes from the bottom up, and it does not bend much because they are hard; and it feels warm to the touch.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you restore it so that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then put plaster on it and support it with a splint, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib break is facing inward, then the patient feels great pain and a kind of crying, because the bone grates; and it causes a great fever, and it is very bad for health, and the old ones have had great difficulty.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if he serves that it should be administered meat that swells the belly, to push the break away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless heated abscesses come, if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, and the sound is good.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we put suction cups on the place to draw off the form, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cups do not attract the excesses to the place by the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one must cover the place with another wet cloth in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space equal, then it is cured of the curse of plague, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that presses on the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to split the bone at the place where the rib is broken, and it is necessary to use a tool to hold it back; and then one must saw the bone, and draw it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, then put on drapes soaked in oil and place them over the affected area; while curing, take care of the affected part with gentle massaging until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break at the throat
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No one comes with a break to the bones of the neck, and it often happens that he cries out; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to anyone and you can't tell if he will recover or not, then be careful if you see his hands soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them out; and if you pierce them with a needle, if he feels no pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many situations, and if he does not feel pain when they are moved or stretched, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if one applies the treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	Et s'il y a des choses étranges qui viennent à l'esprit du dos, et que vous puissiez savoir s'il est sain ou non, prenez garde s'il y a un dessoulement des entrailles, et s'il y a une blessure qui saigne volontiers, et une toux sans volonté, et quand on le soulève sur son ventre, si la toux se produit sans volonté.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is lifted on its back and it tries to stand, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	For it is mortal: do not labor at all in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if he has an abscess, put on the spine oil or pork fat until it is calm; then put on one of the plasters that comforts and dries it up, tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some of the teeth are separated, if necessary cover them with wool; and tie the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment and bandage, until it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called "bone of the jaw", if you have a poultice, put it on your left hand, and hold it equal to your right hand, then apply the plaster and stich it up, if you need to; then bind it, and if there are any teeth that have been separated, put them back in place, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	the broken bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If there is a break in the bone of the thigh, and if there is, there should only be a little bit of damage to the head; and make it long, and lower it to the ground, and bring the patient pain and swelling at the site of the break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting in place is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the fracture; and know what is the fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is at the top of the shoulder, then make this fracture equal, as long as it is in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on his stomach, as long as setting in place of this fracture is convenient for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, if you put a plaster on top of it, then put a wooden or metal stick under it, and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and adjust the position of the joints as long as they are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And order to the patient that he sleeps on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes up, do not touch it until it has calmed down, and put that which we have just said above on top of it; and then return to setting in place, and tighten it as necessary, unless there is some bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, we must restore it according to one of the following two ways: which one is that you take a strong rod, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And you shall take two knots, and tie them together, and lift up the shoulder, and cut the sick person on a table; then lay the broken arm upon the fust, so that it comes to rest against the ground, and have a strong stick ready; then put the sick person's arm upon some heavy object or upon one of his ministers who holds it down; then make the doctor hold the shoulder equal to his hands together, until the broken part has returned as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other way is that the sick person should be made to rest upon his heel, and his hand should be tied to his neck; then order two of his ministers: one to hold what is on the broken part with his hands, and the other to tie fast all the limbs, and extend each to its place.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too much, then hold back the ligature from the rupture, and on the rupture, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the rupture is close to the shoulder blade, then you should put a ligature forward from the break, and another one on the side of the break; and also if the rupture is on the side of the neck, then you should put a light ligature without working too much, until the rupture is even on its place, and on its side; then you should make the rupture even, as it should be, and hold it back, so that the apostemes [bloody spots] don't come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the bloody spots come out, then don't hold back on extracting it for more than 7 days, and put a soft and oiled cloth on the rupture; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put plaster on the rupture, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the side; and wrap the bandage around, and extract it from the arm, so that the arm is in a natural position, unless something prevents it, or the bone is broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a lever, and put on the fracture one more wide and strong than the others, and leave between each lever two spaces, and let each be so large that it passes the fracture three times; then pull up on the levers, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the levers and the extraction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it be tied up until the seventh day, as we have said; then watch each three days whether the pus comes out or not to the place, so that the swelling does not come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you follow our advice.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If no such accident occurs, if only it were not that the shoulder becomes loose after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, with his hands on his stomach; then set up the aid by wrapping it with a flat piece of wool, and check every hour during the day or night to see if the shape of the member is moving or if the ligaments are becoming softer; if so, treat it with medicine, and give him food as described earlier, in such a way that the food is at the first delicate level; and when he starts to improve, make it thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is usual for the aid and leg to be set again after forty days of everything; and then it must be dislocated and bath and medicines with ointments administered to set it right.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if it is stiff and stuck, then it takes a day or two to loosen up.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one small and one large; the small one is at the end of the elbow, and the large one is where the shoulder is attached; perhaps the large foscile breaks by itself, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the healing is easy and quick, but when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult, and more painful when it is broken by itself than when both are broken at the same time.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small foscile is broken, it is necessary to gently extend it and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Et s'il est grand, si le convient est de l'étirer plus fort; et l'étend sur un banc, et tienne le pouchet de la main plus haut que les autres, et les petits doigt plus bas que les autres doigt, et soit le malade croisé dessus lui même, et le banc devant lui plus haut, que le malade ne souffre nulle peine; puis étend les ministres sois bras à la partie désosée à sa main, ou à li liein, et un autre ministre à l'autre au desus.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is large, if it is convenient to stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a bench, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the bench in front of him higher, that the patient suffers no pain; then extend the ministers sois arms to the dislocated part at his hand, or to li liein, and another minister to the other above.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, let each one be put in its place, and if any of them have come loose and hold the two together, and you cannot restore it to its place, then mend it with wood and bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the caustic there is an injury, I have spoken of it to the peculiar chapter; so take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, so I cover them with a caustic made of rosin oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I cover them very gently, until the abscesses are calmed down.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then cover the bone with the cerates, and I put on the plaster of the powder from the mill with plenty of eggs, so that the splints are placed, and let the splint of the break be a little farther forward, and a little larger than the others; and know that there must be six splints or arms in several positions: whether the break is in one bone or in two; and stretch them more up than down, all the time keeping them moist and soft, and not too hard or rough; and let the thread with which they are stretched be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And keep the limb and the joint for a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the member, as when it itches, let the member be soaked with warm water until the itch is gone; and do not restrict the member from resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again to extract it, and if the joint is relaxed and the bone is exposed, and similar things, do not delay.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the joint can not be reset on the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it for a few days until the joint runs again, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not remove the sling until at least 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	I know that at the back of the hand and to us both happen little breaks, and comes but that a plier many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, so that the patient is forced to cross, and sits straight in front of him evenly; then he puts his hand on a table spread out, and extends the broken bones, and sets them even the mirrours, as they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the stops, if an abscess comes, then I put a piece according to the quantity of the place; and is wrapped in a linen drape.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the backyard between the plant of the hand, so I make a piece of linen, and command the patient to strap his broken plant; and then I pull it out of a long drape, and is the piece of five-fold linen as big as the plant of the hand, and pulls it.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if his break is at the end, then it is necessary that you place a spike on, and another free in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then bind him tight around the hand, and seal the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if his break comes to either of the two, then it is necessary that you put a spike in, and another free at the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then bind him tight around the hand, and seal the ligature between the two; or you place a small right spike to raise the break and prevent it from moving; and if the break comes to the other two, as in the index or one of the others, then make it even, and tie it with the sound hand that is next to it; or you tie them all together, so that they do not move, or you put a spike on, as in the pouchet; and take care in the restoration and careful arrangement of the apothecary, and help him who comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the cold breeze
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The breath of the cold is often shaken, and we can see it when it turns before and behind; and restoration is such that we bind it above the shaker, and another cure.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his link equally to his side; and it is when the shaker has broken the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the shaking is near the root of the loins, so that one of the links toward the knuckle, and the other links away from the shaker.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the groin, and then are the links of the groin, and the extension below; then put the surgeon the bone equal with his two hands, as much as he is according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and bandage, because in the cutting there is no pain.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed down, then return to your work and to your treatment; the time is right in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, wrap it in a bandage of tough leather twice over or three times over, and let the excess droop down; then return the leg to as much as possible to the root of the birth, and tie a long piece of thread between the thigh and the leg, freeing up the knee cap, and bring the end of the thread up; then return to the leg and to the thigh with the bandage, then put on stakes over the break, and put one stake over the bone in the leg; then fasten the leather between the leg and the thigh with sutures so that the tightening is even, then begin tying three or four times around the break; and as you go up the break, and lessening the tightening; then take the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie them together at the top, then return to the knee cap where you started, until you come to the roots; and if it does not move from its place, then let it be as it is, then if it comes no more swollen or deformed.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it falls, and addresses the one that comes to it, as we have often said; and if there are pieces of bone that hold it, if it can be done, so do it; and if not, split the place, and pull hard; and heal it as we have said, until he is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never break the kyide in this way as we have said, for the shoulder and arm; however, when restored in this way it does not cause the patient pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the kyide is healed on the second day, or a little more or less, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street from the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	And know that in the street from the knee there is little break, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, there is only a split or a dent, and all the pain comes out, and there is no pain, and this one feels better.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is so that one puts equal to him who is round on his two sides as long as he is united moves what one can; then put the plaster, and I put a flat stone if you need it, and hold it so as it should be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breakers, so that an abscess and another similar thing; so put to each accident what it comes to him as long as he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Sache that in the leg there are II bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all the breaks are like those of the arm; therefore the restoration is done equally, and all the work is done as well. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg returns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his thin nose is broken, turn him around.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick nose is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and turn it back.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then provide extension, and make it even, and bind the joints evenly; however, its break is ugly, and there are many pieces, so let the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two long hair strands that purple the leg on one side and another on the other, and they are as long as the leg from the ankle to the toe; then wrap them in two bands above and below, and bind the bandage firmly in the middle, and at this bandage no leg can decline towards the right or left, and so is good; and each day move each leg to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; if the cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but from the bones of the foot comes none at all and in several cases it has only been dislocated and not broken.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there should be a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones cross over each other, so that the person can barely stand on the ground, and as if he wanted to walk, then now put your foot on its side, where those bones are raised, then press it down until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and put it on, and tie the sole of the foot with a small flat piece of cloth, then fasten it around the ankle, and wrap up some bandages, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three days or four have passed, if the swelling has gone down, because you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Et s'il i a aucuns des deux brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as deux de la main; puis met au deux brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou deux, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j'ai dit, et l'estrain avenanment; et s'il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun deux une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sur lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu'il le teigne bien.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget the other things that I have said about other broken things, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it occurs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone down at the knuckle
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is broken in two at the knuckle, if the woman is seated in an enlarged position, then lean her back against the bed and support her from behind; then fill the opening of the nature with cotton, and put as much in as I can; then remove the woman from the bed, and gently pull on her back little by little, and at once let the cotton drop, until it enters the opening of the nature, and brings the bone with it; and when she urinates, if she holds the cotton back, and when she has urinated, let it be put back, and continue doing so for seven days or more: then will be restored the break, and there will no longer be pain, take a bladder of goat's milk, and tie a cord around the navel, and pour all of the milk into the opening; then blow into the cord forming, until the milk is gone inside: the opening will then be healed; then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days, until it is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the man's or woman's jawbone is broken, return it to its place as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts it into practice and use, and he hears my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means many things to do with the right way of restoration: hear then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the neck, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and wrap it around; then cover with cloth, and leave for three days or more, and it will be healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of fractures with wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is appropriate for those who have fractures with wounds, even if they are great, such as the bones of the chest or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the healed ones whom we have mentioned in our testimony may serve them.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but the vitriol scorches, then you have nothing else, so start restoring the broken part in the same hour, or when the abscesses open.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses open, and you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm, and do not touch them on the third day or the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is protruding from the cheek, it is necessary that you put it out of joint slightly with your hand, with small movement.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal to your hands, take this instrument made of iron with seven or eight links long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he dip it in three or four times, according to what it needs in each cure of a broken part; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your work, and be sharp at the front and broad in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "palainche," for it is convenient that the shoulder-blade be placed on the top of the chief of the bone; and is to be held thus at first, until it returns, and is even one with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must strike at the top of the bone until the instrument has power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back in accordance with what we have said, using either an incision or a saw, within your power; then strike it with a tool of suitable size, or cut it from the bone with small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And if you make it so that it is in its place, then moisten the wound with black wine vinegar and properly tie it up; and do not put on wax or any other thing where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer leech salves when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times this has done the evil miraculously, and has brought upon the patient death or corruption in no case; and let the instrument be softer and more pliable than in other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not right to put it on splints; but wrap it in hard cloths instead of splints and bind it tight.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days break out boils on the wound, if there is anything that you have put on it that has come off, and bind it with a healing ointment, as with a four-fold tar and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be arranged so that the boils run down easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day passes and it cannot be healed but comes together again, knowing that there are small pieces of bone causing it, you must cut the wound with a knife, and take out all these troublesome pieces that bring pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to light, or another form of corruption, then you must heal it according to what the patient says about his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens up on the limb, as with the jaw or shoulder blade, or other large bones, do not pull it out, for many die, but leave it to rot; perhaps after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruces that come from the سودرة
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Come often do we come after the health of the برص (bruse), mostly when it is near a joint, and what an ugly thing it is to see the limb's form; and perhaps cannot make the member's movements natural.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care, then, if we come to you with the برص (brus)  (brus), mostly when it is near a joint, and what an ugly thing it is to see the limb's form; and perhaps cannot make the member's movements natural. Do not apply any of these things separately, or all together, and confound them with wine, turpentine, myrrh, and sulfur, or the like, but put them on the lump in piles, and bind them well, and do not remove them for many days; and then loosen them, and start a new one, until the nodules are hard; or you tie them to a piece of string well made; for the property of the string is that it makes the swelling on the limbs hard; and if the nodule is already hard, it must be cut off, and the excess made visible; or you give it to a barber, until it is hard, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	two limbs which are weak after confinement
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and demure after weak and slender limbs for one of several reasons: because one is too tightly bound, and was not bound so as it should be; or because there are too many ligaments, and cannot come to the member's full extension; or because of too much inflammation; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because he has little blood in his body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body flexible, until the blood increases in it; and give him baths, and provide pleasure and rest; then put pitch on the member, so that the pitch attracts a lot of the full extension, and irrigate it often with hot water, until the full extension comes to the member; and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two members twisted after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the members are twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one should break a member all over again; many such fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm and even death result; however, if the nodules and tortures are fresh, they should be boiled in warm water or soft herbs are cooked, as foils of whale blubber, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the unguent should be made soft, such as well-made dye, and you take the musk of whale blubber, and confound it with goose fat or sisam oil, and make an unguent; or you take fig pastes, and grind them with hay of colon, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the arm placed so that it rubs continuously and repeatedly against moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And make sure there is movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if it is twisted and stiffened, as in the case of stones, then it must be opened with a sharp knife lightly, and put ointment and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay it, and if by chance we put it back in place at its own pace; because then the joints do not move at all when brought to their original position: many times this causes pain and other pains; but when this has happened, so make sure to comfort the sick person, then let it rest, until the abscesses are calm; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then gently adjust it again, and cure each member as the cure comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the plasters for the dislocations of the shoulders until the tips.
des mandibules	of the mandible
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And I have ordered the plasters for dislocations of both jaws, and there are two ways for this: either they are slightly out of place and a little softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down to the neck, and the saliva flows from the mouth so that it cannot be held or the mouth closed, and envelops the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return it by means of the following multiple positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is entirely and completely dislocated, you must immediately bring it back to the hospital, and do not wait; and in such a way that the minister holding the head of the sick person, squeezes the mirrhe a little with one hand at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, the dislocation being of two parts; and the other two hands should be away, to make it even; and order the patient to soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he watches the wound heal evenly, until it regains its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And he brings the jaw back into place, most importantly, if both jaws are involved, then he warms them with hot water and oil, and brings them back slightly; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed securely with a softener, then place it on sheets dipped in oil-and-wax cerot (a substance made of oil and wax), and gently tie them; let the patient sleep on his back, and have his chin between two pillows so that he does not move or strain himself, but eat leichtly, as long as the pains are gone and the jaws are healed; and then let him drink and eat leichtly, and do not work at opening the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well-healed and sound.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and sudden diseases come, and by chance abdominal discharge, and by chance vomit of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many times the one who has it dies, in nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not dislocate from the inside out along the course of the tooth, and is dislocated only once from one side to the other, and it is felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the sick person lies down on his back and stretches his arms; and then he presses the joint with his palm, and it will come back; then put the plaster and bandage on him, and bind it; and the jaw that is turned towards his throat cannot dislocate; unless so, and if it dislocates once, let him return to his place, as we have said; then put the plaster and bandage on, and bind it, and order the sick person to rest until he is well; and in this way the head of the shoulder is also reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	of shoulder dislocation
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And at times it happens to some men that the shoulder is broken or dislocated by a blow; and he thinks it has dislocated itself by that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It therefore follows that you test it, as far as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And the dislocations are to be noted when they turn upwards towards the shoulder, and distinguish between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find between them a clear difference; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and drive the top of the arm to the base of the neck, as if it were one body; and this type of dislocation cannot be brought back without difficulty, when it is new, or when the force has been applied to it while it was ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers hold the hand of the sick person up, then put your fists on the shoulder, and hold the joint with force in place; and the ministers hold the hand, and raise it up, then put it out; so comes suddenly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said above, in the hands of the ministers, then let the sick person be bathed in warm water; and administer a softening and soothing unguentation, as an infusion of aloes and fenugrec and melilote in water, and let it be applied; then let the sick person be sopped on his back, and put a sto of equal length behind the shoulder, not too soft nor too hard, and put the minister's heel on the sto, and hold the head of the shoulder properly, and draw the hand of the sick person up; and have other ministers turn the head of the sick person over, so that he does not move; this shoulder returns all at once, and stops if you do it according to this way: and it is that you do it as follows: let there be a man who is taller than the sick person; and stand on either side of his chest, and put the shoulder behind the shoulder of the sick person, and hold the joint in place, so that the sick person hangs down; and have other ministers draw the hand of the sick person down towards his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then with him put something heavy, and the dislocation will come back again.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And let them also do in another way: and is it that a long branch is stuck into the ground, whose head is also like a pistol, and is not too large or too small; then is put on the lou bad, but he has drapels water on, and the lou bad is lying down on the long stalk; then extend his hand downstream from another side forming, and the joint will come back to its place firmly; and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a branch of II arms of great and IIII fingers wide, which has the chief reont por mues enter em perfectly desoz the assele, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie sus the head of the stalk drapels water, that the stalk does not hurt the lou bad, then put it desoz the assele of the lou bad; and extend your arms up the stalk of the long branch, and lie the ajutoire on the stalk, and the arm at the chief of the hand, then put the arm on I escillon of a eschiele of large size, and let be estendue li hands downstream, and let be left li cors pendans d’autre part: the joint will come back now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is put in place, in whatever way, so that you put a sheep's wool rope equally, then put the plaster out of powder from the mill, with incense and canary of egg, on all the shoulder and back, then strain out the rope equally forward, and tie the bandage to the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands stay like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he sucks a little, until the members are comfortable, because he will heal sooner; and then suck more after 5 or 7 days, and move them; and if they are firm and not softened, they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint moves out of its place due to moisture or another cause, so that you apply three torches, as it is put in front or plastered with torch.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it falls after seven days, and the joint does not stay, and he cannot raise his arm upstream, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint has never been properly placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is caused by a fall backward, and the shoulders, or behind, is made by an impact, and stretching of the hands, and I will administer another place; and cure until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the recovery comes greasiness in the limb, and late movements, then the patient often bathes, until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation from the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint from the neck is dislocated in many places, and returns in many places; and it is dislocated from all sides, especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not properly replaced, for we see it and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the injured shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is worn out and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the shoulder joints do not come together, for if they come together, it would be worse to reset them; and perhaps it cannot be reset at all from the back, which is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and may even lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such, when it is so far along that you can reset it, that you extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands are turned according to the shoulder inside, upside down and upside down, and press the joint into its root together, or at the base of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation up front, so it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm let go which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, then give strong extension; and there are two who extend the arm, and they dye it from both sides so that it does not move at extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide; and when you see the joint to the joint of the hand, then oil it with any oil to soften the joint, then tighten the joint firmly, until it returns; and when it is in place, then put on dry plaster with honey of bee, and strain it firmly, and bind the arm to the throat of the patient, and leave it for some days, then let go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is secure in its place, then loosen it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, then start over with the plaster and the strapping and leave it like this for a few days, until it is securely fixed. Then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint has been moved, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is relieved; or put sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then work it, and let it enter or swim; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the fat back on, and then enter or swim; and do this II or III times until he is well; and if you see that, put warm sheep's fat on the skin with butter, and strain it over; then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand is loose, and its return is lighter than that of other joints However, it must be brought back to place immediately while it is still displaced, so that the joint swells or there is a hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the setting-back so that you put the ill-hand on a tray, and spread the fingers of the hand, and make it equal so that its palm is placed on the appearance of the joint, and hold it like that until it comes back However, it is necessary for you to check if it is well placed; then put the back of the hand of the patient on a tray while you extend and set it back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back hand on the tray, and place his hand on its appearance.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then this is good; but if it is extracted from the pustules that relax the abscesses, and he leaves it thus unremedied.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint is twisted; and there is no help for the patient except to cut the nerve or artery, unless there is another device than to extract by a delicate cauterizing of the case, and perhaps there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have spoken of, then extract and leave it for 5 days, then remove it and leave it again.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then soak it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not dislocated at either end, nor on the back of the palm or the abdomen; then they are brought together and the dislocation is pushed down to the knuckles until it heals, and then the tip of the finger is bent towards the part where it is joined, and left there for a day, and then made straight again that day; and then let it rest, as we have said, and then move it again, and then make it straight, and do this often enough so that it doesn't hurt, and also do this if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and do the same as you did before until it is well; and do the same if it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the wrist on the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or the jaw is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there will be no cure unless you return them to their place, for otherwise the patient will die quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the exudations spring forth without volition, nor can they be retained, and often a limb is softened, or the II ribs or the II arms or I And often the eschinee moves III parts; that which moves behind is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you should treat it if the gilbositez comes from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting down or striking or similar things, the ancient methods of cure with great words brought little benefit to all; but I have condensed it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre formant, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nous avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sur l'épine formant, tant qu'il revienne.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Et s'elle ne revient par ceste cure, si prenne une taule de III bras de lonc, et cheve desoz la paroit, et li maleide soit en coste, et boute le chief de la taule desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la taule sus l'espinette; et mette li mires ses piez sur l'autre chief de la taule, et presse bien, tant qu'il revienne au leu; et si tu veux, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not respond to this cure, then take a table three arms long, and shave one side of it, and let the patient lie on his side, and pour the water from the table over his head, then put the middle of the table over the spine; and set the minister's fingers on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you wish, do the same with the turner that turns in your hand. And then tie the link that is among the helpers to the turner toward the head, and the other link to the turner toward the fingers, and let each minister turn his turner on all the link, and the master put the spine in order as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, put it on with dry plaster and then the daps, and then the wooden tablet of III long feet, which purplishly marks the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then the thread of a rope, as we have said, and let the patient use subtle fasting until he is well; and if at the end of health anything comes, then administer medicines that soften and even it out, with the tablet that we have mentioned above; and never give him a piece of lead, and never come to appearance in the back spine of the back, and be careful that this is dislocations; and that is the bone that opens, for which one should not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the joints of the hip and the shoulder come only from dislocations, not at all like the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parties: inside and outside, before and behind; and more inside there, and less dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy, it is longer, and more so than the healthy genitals, and the sick cannot double his knee on fire; and it is the place which is swollen hot by an abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that one who comes to the outside, is that this accident is opposite to these in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that one who comes in front are that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double the knee with pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot go before, and holds back his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has been behind, if it is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the shoulder of the hip is out of place between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And the signs of this dislocation if it is that you ignore it, then it lingers according to its disposition, so there is no cure; and it is not worth taking a chance.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, so hurry that you reset the joint, and turn it in and out, and move it to the left and right; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not come back in this way, then it is necessary that you prepare one minister very well, and hold the leg very firmly with two hands, or tie it to the floor with a strong rope; and other ministers extend their hand above and below at the same time, so that they press their hands against his arms, then tie him to the rope under the armpit; and others pull back his head; and they extend both sides simultaneously, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and stays like that.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to put cure on its appearance When the dislocations are in the head, you must lay the patient down on his back, then place the bandage over the crown of the head, and the cloth that is removed from the angle, then put the bandage upwards towards the angle, and upwards towards the forceps; then take other ministers to its arms, and embrace the large cloth of the diseased cuixe, and extend it towards the end form: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is more lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot put it in this way that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the two legs of the sick together with a strong bandage wrapped around the heels and knees, and let the sick leg be extended twice as much as the other one; then hang it by the head from a post, and let its two arms be outstretched; then command a minister who will embrace the head of the cuixe, and let there be other ministers hanging with the sick one, who will embrace the cuixe well, for the joints now return very well.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	Et when the dislocations are in the way, so lie down the patient, as we have said before in that which has gimbosity, and extrude him by the foot properly, and also by the leg; then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then put one torch between the legs of the patient against the form; and plant there drapes moistened around, lest they hurt the patient, then spread each servant towards him, and let the doctor set the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on a table, and press him as we have said in gimbosity, and lie down the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are in front, so extend the injured leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and let the doctor place his pain on the injured ankle, then press with the other hand, and extend it sideways towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are far away, it is not convenient to extend the patient downward, nor to lift him up from the ground, but rather that he should be as if he were lying on his back as we have said in the case of two legs; and on his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and you should press it on the joint to the table; and it will be complete when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; so then set the splint, and put the plaster, and strain it with a bandage, so that the leg does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, then strain them again, as before, and let them rest for three days; then remove them, and let them go, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the hip
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	is displaced within and without, and behind; but does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not bend at the hip, so that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his knee between your palms, and pull apart with both hands, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and other ministers extend his foot, until the hip returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg at the hip easily; and put the plaster on, and make him walk, and join the members together firmly for three days or four. Then let him loose; and do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, give a strong extension, as we said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never misaligned, and never completely dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and it bends before the part where it is dislocated: with slight movements, we bring it to our hands when it is only slightly misaligned.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated from the top, you must put the patient upright, and stretch the leg away from them, over the ankle; then bring the foot to your right hand, and then to your left twice, then raise it up, and push it down firmly; and do this twice, as we said, by pushing and pulling the foot: if it returns, it is good; if not, start again with the treatment, because it will return; and if it cannot return like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a rod firmly between his thighs, and tie the sheets so that he does not fall; then stretch the leg healthy at its end, and others ministers extends the foot in their hands or at the leg, that they keep the foot when you extend it; then put the surgeon equal to the dislocation in their hands, and others ministers stretch the healthy leg away from them, and the dislocation will return completely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is well done, so that the plaster and the staves are formed, and the foot is tied to the leg, and the strings that are behind the ankle are not too tight; then leave it II days or III, and let the strings become soft, if the brace; then take it off on the third day or fourth, and go to see the sick person after IV days; and if he goes forward this term, there is no danger that he will fall again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come out, so that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, as long as they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so that it is done well without work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are not in any way at the back of the foot, so that you make the sick person sit on a plain bed or table all straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot into form, as long as it recovers; and when it is even, and there is no opening, so set the sole of the foot on a table at two ends, then form the brace, and leave it III days, then take it off; and let him rest, as long as he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are skilled in the art and have used it long, and unless you are compassionate and late to judge; do not be courageous. And use at first soothing things for an abscess, and leave the patient with God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, now restore the limb to its place, so that the abscesses come; and when the limbs are in their places, administer dry things, and cure the wound as it should be, with the ointments we have said for simple diseases; and do not enter a path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will bring you to ruin according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming and protecting yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
