O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, with its explanations and clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is very much practiced in our region and is well known everywhere, it is a perfect science and adequate, and there is nothing to delay it from the forays but the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, error and vanity have come, and intentions are closed, and the science is obscured.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Or me seems that I will vivify it together with the order of this doctor according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is fitting.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary that the one who deals with it master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so much that he knows the judgment of the members, and the shapes and connections and separations of the arteries, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of the joints, and the movement and the moving veins and the resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason that Hipocrates said that nothing is more difficult than to know how to do it and how not to do it, and in the art of hands is most difficult.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction to this book that if one is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, he should be careful not to make a mistake or harm others; so that I have repeatedly seen many of those who engage in this science and also abandon themselves to it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and also cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another foolish man who carried a stone for a man of Eaze, and the stone was large; he brought with him a piece of the bladder, and he died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen one who was called to pull out a stone from a man; and I saw the state of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they had pulled it out, he would surely have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see I. another wonder which took in cure I. duke of our land who had the leg broken, and with the breaking there was a wound. And the miracle plain of ignorance drew out the breaking on the wound as it was healed by strong medicine, and left not at all at the wound no hurt, and so left him 1 . i. finished; and commanded that he should not have taken it off; and delayed so that the leg was all well and his bones came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was in peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways corruption was confirmed where the member was, and he could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the members were all lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see I. another wonder which took in cure an abscess which was rotten, and then inflamed by the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is purified of melancholy humor, it only comes about that one touches it with iron if it is not in the right place so that one can completely destroy what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, skilled son, you must know that work with hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these divisions in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For so you must keep yourself, lest the foolish man speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that, by the grace of God, you may come to salvation and be loosed; and reject those diseases that cause grief of body; and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galienes warns against such practices: "Do not take on the care of a sick person unless you are called upon to do so out of respect for that person."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to .ii. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the beginning of the treatment up to the feet; and about the shapes of instruments, the iron tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and drilling, and suction cups for wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the subsequent chapters are ordered and provide the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torments and other similar things; and it is ordered to make the joint of the shoulder as long as possible, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remind ourselves of the work; it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and the harm is the longest word and subtle science and the secret answer; and many wise people would speak about it, and agree with what I say; and I am short of words, for I shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is an aid for all colors or matter, except for two colors: that is to say, color heat matter, and color dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, they agreed neither and said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the opposite: that cautery does not help in diseases which come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured with heat by heat, nor with dryness by dryness; and he who says the opposite that cautery does great aid to hot and dry disease which comes in courses of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found this by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And any path, doesn't get mixed up except for those who have tried it and who know by long use the cauterizing ointment, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the effects and space of ten; we don't fear others' complexions, however much cold and moist they are.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this will agree and accord with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that together fire and cauterization by fire are more effective in cure than medicinal cauterization, and of greater benefit.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not before than to the limb which is cooked, and does no harm to another member so much as name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medications come from one member to another by way of distance, and bring about disease in the limb through healing; and perhaps occasion harm to the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything except if it is in excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the veracity of things; and because I do not wish to waste words, for fire's secret, which is revealed in action, and the quality of the work - how it cures the diseases of the body - as the philosopher teaches through a demonstration; receive this in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at certain times, and they are to be prayed for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, since the sudden harm that arises is remedied by the aid of cauterization; and most especially, if the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be put up with until the time when greater harm comes upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think at all, son, as some foolish people do; for when a disease is cured by cauterization, there is no return to the illness; and it serves thus: but it is not like that, because cauterization is merely medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and it is worth more than medicine for its swiftness in effecting a cure, and for its virtue and excellency.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness will not return according to the color of the disease and its place and excellence; and superflous things are gathered in it by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where there is little superflidity and moisture, as when cauterization is thick for pain, and similar things, and the illness does not return; but it comes to pass.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand that fire cauterizations are called the derriers of medicine, and this is so; but they do not believe that cauterizations are worth anything after medicine, but their understanding is false, and fire cauterizations are the derriers of medicine for this reason that whenever we have administered methods of cure in any disease and they have not been worth anything, then we administer fire cauterization, and it is worth something.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, recognize that fire cauterizations are the derriers of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Therefore, the ancient ones said that fire cauterizations of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not speak of this because of the quality of gold or due to its height; and they said that the heat of a cauterization does not cause ulceration, but this is not true for I have experienced it, and I have found that in certain people it does; and fire cauterizations made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, as they stated.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case when you heat an instrument of gold, you are not like when it is heated by the color of gold, and it often cools down; and if it is too hot; so let it go to fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter of the book up to here, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery: For olive oil cautery on the scalp, and in it there are two things that are done because of a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the hair, and to the ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and most importantly for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be cleansed by a medicine that softens the nose .iiij., according to what the virtues and the lightness and the habit of the patient can bear; and then have the nose of the patient removed.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place a cross between your hands, and put his hands on your chest; after that, put the root of your thumb on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let the two fingers come together, if it bleeds, then heat the cautery which is called 'oliver', for this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place it on the ink signet, and pull down and extract your hand slowly and carefully in twisting; then release your hand completely, and watch the bone; and if you do not see it, then restart the cautery as soon as you see the bone, as I told you; after that, take 1 handful of silk, and put cotton in it wet and soft, and place it on the spot, and leave it there for 3 days; after that, put cotton soaked in oil on it; and let it be heated until it is stiff; then cure the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmacon', as long as it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And say the ancient one that, the longer the wound is left open, the more it will heal; and for this reason, if necessary, apply it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should let the cautery burn so much that part of the bone is burned, and then put back what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one should let the cautery burn so much on it, and push so hard that part of the bone is burned as well, as women put in their furrows so that humors come out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must heal and bandage.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of burning the cautery do not seem to me to be good for anything except in some men where there is a possibility of fear; and it seems to me that I should let it burn because the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even more so when the shoulder of the sick man is weak by nature, and the first appearance of the cautery seems to me to be more safe and mild for me, and from which I use to heal with ease.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts long, then should use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head purging and oils and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery that we have said before, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him slightly as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making a fire cautery on each horn of the head, as we have said above, and making a fire cautery where you put the leech; and it is the same with regard to the application of the leeches; and let your hand be so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cornes cauteries be thinner than those on which we make a fire cautery on the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When there is sudden pain in one side of the head, and it extends to the oil, and the jaw is purged with medicinal substances, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them benefit: then do the cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When there is sudden pain on one side of the head, and it extends to the oil, and the jaw has been purged with medicinal substances, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them benefit: then do the cauterization according to 1.2 ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire. For the fire cautery, take a hot stone, and remove the bark and peel 1.2 pieces of wood, and then place it on the temple or where the pain is in such a way that you can pour the hot stone over the skin; and when it has been poured on, let it rest and tighten it well and leave it so for 15 hours; and then take off and treat with fresh garlic, and leave the wound open for 2-3 days, then put cotton soaked in oil in the wound.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil treatment until it is well; and if you see that fire has done any harm, then do one of the treatments with burning substances that I have written or second cure with fiery substances.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The cure of iron if it is according to this way: Heat the iron in such a way:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has .i. poc of curve, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little lightly, until the half of the keur [knee] be burned; and let go your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and runs abundance of blood.
de emigraine	de emigrine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Quant tu cures emigraine si com nous avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que le cautere devant dis de la médecine et dou fer ne lui soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est appelé "cultellare" tant qu'il soit blans; et signe ainsi sur le leu doillant une ligne de demi doigt de long, et ôte ta main une fois, et l'estrains que tu ne coper l'artere et que ne viennes jusques à l'os; et te wardes de la mandibule qui mute quant on mange, et le ner n'ait regart que la muet et que spasmes ne vienne à la maladie, et te wardes de decorrement de sanc de l'artere lorsqu'elle sera coptée, ou copée ait grand paor et plus souvent à celui que ne s'y connaît, et qui n'est pas étudiants et éprouvés; et laisse l'œuvre en mi voie; mais je vous dirai comment on retient la sanc lorsqu'l'artere est coptée, et je vous montrerai où il afiert en cet livre.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with fire in the head as well, as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said, or the chaplete of extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has 19 knives; and this cautery is better than that and more useful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears due to cold, and one has taken the medicines that we have said in the division on the cure of it, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", from which this form comes:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After heating the tip of the cautery completely around the painful ear, or around both ears if the pain is in both, and moving it away from the root of the ear slightly as you have marked the spot, then place 10 points on each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	the torture which must be cured by fire is only effective for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and not to use fire on similar things that come from scabs and lice.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this torture-like condition that moves with fluid, such as the one caused by ear wax and head washes and gargling, and that is worth a single fire; therefore, you must use three fires: one in the root of the ear, another slightly closer to the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the fire in the healthy part, and let it burn until half of the fire is consumed; and this is the form of the fire:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the shape of the scalpel that we have mentioned before, but it is slightly finer and it is necessary for the blade to be slightly thicker; after curing the area as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, then make 23 fire cauteries: 19 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 on the top of the head, and 1 where they call "vesselz" as we have said before, and a fire cautery in the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lead
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This is a medieval medical text discussing the treatment of a disease with lead, which is given in large doses to the patient and is believed to affect the brain. The text then describes a method of applying a caustic substance, possibly lead or saltpeter, to the top of the head as part of a treatment regimen. The final sentence provides instructions for how to execute this treatment methodology.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If this is effective, it is good; and if not, he makes 23 fire cauteries by cutting the top of the head down to the collarbone, leaving a space of 1/2 inch between each cautery. There are two large ones; and the patient is cured as with the others, and if he appears to be struggling, and the disease is severe, he makes 1 fire cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, 19 more on the 2 horns of the head, and the patient is cured. The cauteries which are called "olive" should also be made as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	of the cold
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	Et s'il s'agit d'un enfant qui ne peut pas supporter le feu, on lui fait de la gargarisme et de la mastication avec des viandes dures; après on lui met le chef au milieu, et on fait .i. cautère selon ce que nous avons dit ci-dessus, et .i. cautère sur la nuque, et sur chaque corne ; et s'il est éloigné et souffrant, on lui fait les cautères comme je l'ai dit à celui qui a la paralysie et la mollesse du cou, sur l'épine dorsale et le cou, et on fait les cautères d'olivier selon la manière que j'ai dit.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, one should make a subtle cauterization according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt moisture and thick fluid, then one should make partial cauterizations as we have said to the patient who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy is declining excess in melancholy, and the cou of the patient is moist, then one should give him to drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Here is the first sentence of the text:
de l’awe des eulz	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	Here is the first sentence of the text:
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has ordered his head to be cauterized, and it is cauterized, and he makes .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples if he loses his hair in spots, or all over, and covers all the cauterization with the veins and arteries that are exposed, so that the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and you guard against blood loss, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop pouring it.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to cauterize and stop the bleeding when extracting the arteries, and how to incise without causing pain; and never cauterize or hem the 2 bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	the two hearts of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deplete the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outwardly; and one can see that it is superfluous cold phlegmatic, then he makes the fire cautery that I have said at the beginning of the awen that descend upon the tears: 1. cauterization of the head, and 2. cauterizations on the 2 temples, and 3. cauterizations where he hemmed the 2 bones; and if it is necessary more, then he makes the cauterization thoroughly on the skin above all small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	The following is the translation of the provided text:
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened with disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called 'olive'
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that fire cautery is done on the 19 scabs as long as the scabs are; and do not let go of the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	and if he pricks at his base,
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	For the hairs that point to the oil, they are converted into the pardern, and they prick the oil, and one makes fire cautery or medicine that burns according to .ij. ways: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown long and even, then put the patient on his side; after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the feather of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign with which to cut the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and musk-root on the oil, then heat up the fire from which this shape comes:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the cure is burned in place; and the sign of the work of health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the tip of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for  .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter until it dries out; after the poultice of wound healing as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on this same middle place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are loose, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical heat cautery is that you order the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the form of the feather of mirth; then take of French soap and hot water, of each one a .z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that it does not cool down, then in expelling on the form that you have made like the feather of mirth, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease is in only .i. oil, then operate in .i., and also in both; and put cotton wet in wax and musk-root; and the head of the shoulder, which is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done this for a long time, keep the medicine on your tongue.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the mordication is finished, if the wound has been opened by fire or incision, then it is well; if not, then add more medicine to the area where it has not been opened yet, until your hairs are even and set in place, and then put cotton wetted with oil on top of the wound for as long as the burn is sore, after that, cure the wound that is called "dyafenis" and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must take great care of your wound with great diligence so that the medicine does not rub on the hairs. And if the paper becomes soft after, and if the hairs are rubbing in the oil, then start again the medicine on that same place that has become soft from the paper properly, just as you did before; after curing it until it heals; and this is the form of the paste with mint:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of men are different in size and length, and according to what your constraints are; and do not answer the right way to those who have the study of this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit them, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip the scalp with cotton wicks soaked in oil or wine juice onto an oil; then heat the cauterizing iron which is sharp: and hold it at the top of the scalp as if a feather, together with the tip being the iron; but if you see, if it were from one side of the head to the other, and if not, it should be like a tent; however, whatever the case may be, this that is held over the head will suit for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it out; and if it is closed, then work on it, and seal it firmly; after that, place the cauterizing iron sharply, and hold your hand over the iron at the part of the head where the oil is, so that your hands do not go crazy; and place the iron in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the cauterization just up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cauterization once more, and if necessary, let it lie .iiij. days; after put cotton wet with oil on it, and cure for drying until it is healthy, and if after .xl. days it is still unhealthy, then put medicine with corrosive water until the bone is uncovered, and treat according to that which has come out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And I have a method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients has spoken of. Understand fistula, and cut it; after put in the incision .i. small steel wire so as to be the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I pour the quantity of a 1/4 of a spoon; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the melted drops do not run to their oil; and it comes that you put on cotton oil wet with oil in a cloth or towel: the drop should be placed artfully at the fistula's opening, and the patient is cured by miracle.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer water to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the face of the nose according to what comes out in his own chapter.
des crevaices en levres	of the creases in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	times, there are creases in the lips which are called "hair", and most commonly in the lips of infants.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these creases with the method we have described in the divisions, and the cure does not take place, then heat a small surgical blade according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it carefully into the creases as long as it stays in place; after cleaning, apply a paste of saltpetre until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or in the roots of the teeth, after having made pus and swelled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: therefore it is necessary that you have .i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having patched or perforation of the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron comes to the well of it, and behind it; and do so once or twice., after the cure of what we said in cures, as long as he is healthy; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and cut off the rotten bone, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and that does not work, then put the head of the disease in your well; after heat the cautery so that its form will come as you will put a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hot inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and let it sit there for an hour and wash it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way those who were moving are stopped, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and corrupted.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or heat, and the medicines do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery according to .ij. ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a vatche, and the tip in a copper or gold needle; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and moisten it with butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully, and hold it as long as it cools down; and do this often until the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and you see if the wool and cotton become wet with the butter, and put it on the tooth that hurts, and put it on 1 copper needle so hot that the fire comes to the jaw.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery is complete when the patient bites on a piece of iron or brass, and the heat does not reach his mouth; then warm the cauterizer, so that it takes shape as follows, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be worse the next day or the day after. And it is fitting that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cauterizer, and then swallow it; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery from the root tooth that you wish, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the jaw:
des scrophules	Of scrofula:
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of pus and cold dampness, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then warm the chert tooth that you have, for according to what it is needed, it has 1.3 openings for the fumes to rise from the cauterizer on the other side; and put the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or as much as it needs to come to the root of the abscess; and leave it there for 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil on it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with oregano and bandages until it is well.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture prevails over the throat, and most certainly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by digestive medicines; after that, the fire cautery is made to the root of the throat, and you must keep back from the throat, and dare not kiss but a little. After that, another fire cautery is made to the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cauterization be called "clavicle" from which we get the shape before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	(from the throat)
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all illness is from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then you make ij cauterizations on the roots of the throat; and another fire cautery between two breasts; and let the cauterization be called  "clavicle" according to the shape which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, make the cautery by piercing all the cauterizations which are called "poins" from which the shape is as said in the disease of the ears; and let the piercing go up to .xxx., or so. After that, cure the place according to what has been said before, and let the cauterization be made with three burns according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And so this fire cautery is lighter because you have made it.iiij. times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, the patient should lie down on his back and his chest; then with two fingers of your left hand, gently press in towards the center of the joint that is dislocated; and if it has moved into place, then warm the cautery that has one nail; here is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize it until he pierces as far as the coast, and comes together with the figure of cauterization the three cauteries; and for this one is made the cautery with the cautery that has three ners, because the figure of cauterization are placed cauteries; and the nerf according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is placed on this one nerf for there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery for the neck to grind with salt; after let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if he is dislocated above, what thing has poked, then make cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or many cauteries in piercing. For the joint is closed, and is osteous the moisture and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	To cure a cough
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	To cure a cough, they used to say that you should make use of the roots of aristo-logous plants, and in this way: Take a root of aristo-logous plant that is long, the largest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; then wet it with oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize. That is to say, cauterize between the neck and the chin, and a few small cauterizations just below the beard; and a few between the fifth rib and the sixth, by lowering a little bit; and one on the breastbone, and another between the shoulders, and a few between the shoulder blades; and one behind the breastbone, and one between the nipples, and one between the two nipples. And do not press your hand tight, but rather open it widely as though you were smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And no ancient said that any man should use fire cauterization resembling a razor, and scrub and place it between the ribs, until it comes to the aposteme of the liver; and he leaps from the pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear, or the patient dies now, or there is a fistula that cannot be healed.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse with the methods we have mentioned for treating divisions, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways to perform cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these three methods, one is that you make 3.iii. cauterizations, or 4.iiii., by lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cauterization we mentioned above; and do not press your hand down on all the cauterization, and let the patient be soothed on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another method of cauterizing is that you heat the cauterizer which has 10 nails, as we have shown in dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cauterizer where the mouse's hair grows, or where the cut comes from the left side, and let the elevation on which you place the cauterizer be according to the length of the mouse's back, and the cauterization be according to the width of her chest.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, with the 10 nails heated, you let them be perceived from the other side, and then trim the cauterizer; and so there are 4.iiii. ways. And if you wish, after having cauterized completely with the 3.iii. cauterizations, you can add a fourth cauterization to complete the treatment. After the cure has taken effect over a long period of time, and this is better than the other cure mentioned above.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Of dropsy
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cauterization uncovered for a long time, do not leave the patient's cure without cauterizing; and with the help of God, healing would hurry and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization for the navel is the one that we have in front of us mentioned; and this one for the back is olive, according to what it is mentioned here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen in the case of one who is hydropic, and they are purple in color, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and lower your hand with the cautery without turning it. And do not go too deep, lest the cauterization cause the purple to turn blue, and make the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the toenail; and let the cauterization be long, one behind the knee and another in front of it, leg by leg; and let the cauterizations remain a while without cleaning, so that the awes are removed; after that, cure the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution from the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as much as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach are in the intestines are exhausted, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, then do so  .i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, with cautery circulating; and  .iiij. cauteries around the navel subtly to all  .i. cautery clawed subtlety, and  .ij. cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, then do cautery on the hand, and   .i. cautery on each finger, and   .ij. small cauteries on the stomach of choice because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrupt humors, and are cured if as we have said in divisions, and does not benefit, then do   .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all defuers almecdate poc and poc in triangularizing, and   .i. cautery almecdate boude.  ii. two;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cool, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the cheek, then let there be a great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and one other on the milk to all the cautery nailed; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the skin, if you heat the cautery that seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on the treated skin; and leave it so that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, from which it does not move; do this once or twice, and if there is much skin, cauterize each as we have said before; after treat with beneficial ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a wound or opening, we will tell you in due course what form of illness it is that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is a fistula and it is swollen and moist with putrid matter, we will show you how to make a tent of fine mesh, and be sure that you know exactly how big the tent needs to be; after that, heat the fire-brand which seems sharpest, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and begin the brand again as long as the putrid and corroded flesh is burned, once or twice, depending on the quantity of the required mixture; and be careful about the nerves which are in there, and do not make this fire-brand except in a charnel-house, and believe that it is not dangerous; after that, cure the place until it is healed, and if the matter has been expelled, and the bones have been exposed for a long time, then know that the fistula is completely healed; and if the matter has not been expelled, know that the fistula is threefold, and the bone is corroded at its root; and thus as one of these which we will describe in due course.
de la maladie des reins	from kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes with a strong wind, and does not respond to the use of women, then you must make a fire-brand on both sides of the kidney with the fire-brand which we have described above; and if we make two fire-brands in line, it will be even more helpful.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and prone to water and moisture, so that the patient retened urine, then let a fire cautery be made in the part behind the bladder, where the hair grow from the knuckle, and on the right and left, and such cauteries as long as a fingernail; and make a cautery behind the back, where you need it; and let those cauteries be clamped according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	of the kidneys
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the kidney is cold and moist, so that it does not allow one to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and late in coming; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore let three fire cauteries be made around the testicles, as we have said for the bladder, and two behind the back; and let those cauteries be clamped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the places of the department are found, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip box at.i. a fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place inside the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if it is such cauteries as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, then make.iij. cauteries with the large olive, and let the cauterization be perfect as well as all the rest; and the treatment until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the chest of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills, or other bad pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the way of the cautery is according to .ij. ways: that is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, from which one is such: that you cauterize on the chest of the hip .iii. cauterizes triangular according to this form, and make it deep and wide, and leave between each cautery the space of a thumb, and make them olive-colored; never do you make cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it a circular shape so that the circle contains all of the hip, and all the space of the cure is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the way to do it in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it comes only up to the thigh and leg, then you make  .ij. cauterizes on the side where the patient feels the pain, and 1.3 cauterizes above the ankle 2.iiij. times, at the part where the patient feels the pain, or near the heel, if the pain extends up to there: make cauterize with a knife, and burn the thickness of the cure; and if the patient feels that the pain reaches up to two feet or near the heel, then you make cauterize at these points on the  .ij. side:
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the profession requires it, do so; and if he feels that the pain is going from the foot to the thigh, perform a fire cautery using a knife or circular tool, and carefully guard all your tools so that you do not let go of any of them while burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing greater damage and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have performed cauterization on the ankle of the foot and let it go so that the leg was completely deformed, as well as the bones, and it became perforate and corrupt throughout the bones. After a treatment of the abdomen which killed him.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in three parts together, perform cauterization on one and then on the other according to this method. // And the wise said about cauterizing the ankle, for this is the way, make a piece of iron and let it be as thick as a finger knuckle or slightly less, and let it be between the chevrons and let it be from one chevrons to another of a space the size of a fingernail; and let the chevrons be covered on both sides, and let them also be like nails, and there should be 24 pieces of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and giddy, and then put it on the box of the painful ankle, and let it turn on the back of the rib; and make one cauterization once and leave it for three days; and then make plaster with ointment, and leave the open wound long enough to heal.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its smell, and few are those who use it; and yet this is a good cautery which can be忍受and used where it afflicts.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of both
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either through eating too much or by impact or by excessive discharge, or by the appearance of expanded cold matter, none of these appearances are worth using cauterizations unless it is from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that after this person has voided any foul pills or other things from their body, that they be applied to their back where the pain is, three lines signed with a knife, and in each line 3 cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and it is done according to the cautery that is called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 cauterizations or 5 at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l'encomencement si est qu'il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l'apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and when you have seen it cured, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire is equal in color to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with a burning cautery at a depth of 1 or 2 lines, and let the points be close together. After you have cured it as we have said, beware that you do not apply fire to gilled flesh, which is in the nervy part.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the doctor calls "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it can be cured by cauterization in this way: Make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and make the olive cautery according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When it is necessary to grasp the foot, make a fire cautery over the entire joint and over each of the toes. .iii. cauteries or .iii. more if necessary, of each part with the olive cautery; and if you need more, do so, but hold your hand firmly only as long as the skin is burning.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	If the pain descends to the foot and back, administer the cautery we have described in the chapter of this book. If the pain is in the hands, make an incision 2 inches deep; and if there remains any pain in the two joints or in the hair of the hand, cauterize each joint and the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient well with medicines. For if you govern him well and purify the fluids, he will be healed by the grace of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the Syphyl
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the bile descends to the bowels and is new, so that when you look at him to cure him, he does not hurt him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after it sits down on its back between your hands, and orders him to tie his beard as long as the bile is repaired, and bring them to your hands, and sign with one hand the rupture on the bone at the knuckle, and all a sign that is like half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is white and it pours out. Then bring the balls to their place; and the minister tie his hand so that he does not turn back; and well operate on the legs of the patient, and put there .i. cussin and .i. sergeant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which ties his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it firm and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so start again another time until you reach it; and be careful that the bile does not run when you are making the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be delicate according to their measure, and that of the old ones also large according to their measure; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with oil until it heals; after other remedies until he is well, and lie down the patient for 10 days on his back until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his bandages be relaxed for a long time, so that the bile does not run when he gets up to go to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, he should be given a well-made bandage, and have it applied for .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much noise; and when he has done this teaching, let him be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chaplet.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third angle according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first sign is the edge of the belly and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and join your hands together at all the cauterizes: But the first cauters are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine has no effect, then it is necessary to use fire cauterization, which is called "poins", and apply the cauterization according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its feebleness, its virtue, and its location in relation to torments, and its pain. If he is healed after the first cauterization, it is good; but if not, then begin again with another cauterization on top of that one, for this treatment requires that you perform the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Here comes the translated text:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the fever is everywhere spread; and it clearly declines, then you must cauterize all these cauteries that we have spoken of at the head, and that is, a cautery in the loins, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and seven cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the skull, and one other delicate, and two on the shoulders, and two on the couting, and two on the tenderloin of the loin, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the pits of the hands; and guard against the knots that are behind the loins, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the knuckle, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauterizations I make, the more help I give, and it is to my profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as much as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted. It is necessary that the cauterizations be great or small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the form of iron. After this, cure him with flour and other cures until he is well.
de enfleure	de enfleurer
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
de albaras	"Of healing wounds."
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	"When the disease called 'albaras' is present and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a small fire according to the size of the wound, until the blotch is lifted and the color changes; then heal with flour of times and lentils, mixed with olive oil and plantain leaves, and hawthorn and almond sap, each in part; and mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the wound until it heals."
li cure de chancre par cautere	"The cure for leprosy by cauterization:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the ulcer comes at the beginning, and you stop the vision, if the cautery is made with a ring-like cautery all around the ulcer. And moreover, it is said that the cautery should also be made in the middle of the ulcer; and moreover, I do not think this is good, for I fear that it will become an ulcer and corroded, and I have never wanted to do this before; and a more right thing is that it should be cauterized all around, with the ring-like cautery, as we said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to die, or because of the excess of blood that it makes, or because of the age of the person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of his tenors (that is to say, his debts); then cauterize him all around with small cauteries, piercing; then let it be. For she will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce her all over with the cautery, let the cautery be very hot of which this is the shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has done its work, and make them such cauterizations that the patient feels relief in some way that the course of the putrefaction is chosen. After the cure, as long as he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of a disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing but a gangrening of the members, for it gnaws the members as fire dries up wood. If you see this disease in its early stages, which can be cured with fire, then heat the cauterizes carefully, large and small, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after the fire has done its work, leaving no corruption behind, but all that is corrupt has been burned away. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns of the fire are healed, and all corruption is gone. After the oil cure, if health does not return after .iij. days, then start the cauterization again on the part that is delayed. And this gangrene is never cured with medicinal ointments in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure of medicinal ointments in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mouth times have happened that the pies by defects naist a disease which is called "clos" according to our intent, and it is a great thing fotted which bleces the foot. And the cauterions of this disease so are according to .ij. manners. That is to say cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water. Cautery with fire if you heat .i. cautery also like a quill of vaulting, and is made of good iron at the measure that he may porpenre the nail from all sides, and that there are subtle margins; after it puts all hot on the nail, and turns your hand all around the nail as long as it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leaves it thus .iij. days until it begins to move putritude; then he makes a plaster with wild mallows crushed with water, and leaves the plaster on all night, and nails cherra and will be rooted from its roots. Then cure the wound with char so much as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if the heart is converted by defects, and many times come and go in hands and pies, it comes that you bring cautery with hot water; and it is a half way manner: take a string of rain or iron, or a quill of vaulting, and put on the nail and the althelma, that is to say porrelz verrues; and puts the string on so that it porpreignes all around, then you put a little hot water, and holds your hand well, and presses your hand turning so that the margin of the string comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and lets the patient a little the mordication of the hot water for an hour; then leaves it, and will be rooted from all its roots. So you do one after another, as long as you have dried up all these that are in the heart, then cure them with char that generate pain.
li cure dou trembler	Then cure the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	If some shiver of cold or fever or other, it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauterizes or .iv. on the spine of the back, 1. cauterize between each spine; and 1. cauterize at the feet, and 1. to the olive-colored cauterize in the stomach, so he will leave him trembling, and hasten the cure for the cold disease.
des pustules puans	with pus
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	For any time the body bathes in defuses the cors, or pustules pus, that come from large corrupted matters: it is necessary at the first when they appear that you make cauterize on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterize of fust of mirth, so the point is taken to the fire, or of root of aristologe far away, or to the lenticular cauterize. And no time are the cauterizes done at the beginning when it appears in this way, and they do not grow anymore, but are broken up from the surplus that comes out, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Maitres, let us speak of the great dangers of blood flowing from an artery that is cut at the edge of a wound or incised at an abscess or cauterized limb, and similar things; for it is a terrible thing to smell bad.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Many times there are great dangers of blood from the artery that is cut at the edge of a wound or incised at an abscess or burned limb, and similar things; for it is a terrible thing to smell bad. And wherever this happens, if you quickly place your index finger on the vein of the wound, and strain it so much that the pain subsides from your index, and no more drops come out; then put fire on olive oil, small or large drops according to the wound and its location, considering that the artery is blocked, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in place until the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If he starts to run when you lift your finger off the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take another cautery that is on fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cauterizing, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly winding a thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and be tied and held firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat with strict care of the cloth or place things burning on, or other similar things, if not, then it is useless to try.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this should come to anyone and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then he must put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it there for a long time so that the blood stops; and don't move the finger, but moisten it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thick and stopped; and make an incision in advance at the place where he needs to cauterize and apply medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cautery, burning medicine, and the ingredients and forms of cauterization are necessary; and I have placed that chapter from the beginning to the end, and I will go on in this chapter by the same path for those who want to try it more lightly than those who wish to hurry.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to talk about this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapters of the treatises on cauterization, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to take any foolish risks. For such people come in whom, because of the great severity of their disease and the magnitude of their evil, they die easily through their own foolishness, and so they should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of such people one can get the wrong idea, and say: "Wait, I am going to die"; and the disease is evilly disposed. It is not right that you should consent to such people who come to you with this manner, but rather put greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open widely but carefully and wisely in regard to those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have gotten (a reputation for) good name, glory, and memory; and if such a one helps you to obtain these things, he will be blessed with good reputation, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you this chapter in dividing it into chapters, according to that which is before you, that is the cauterization, that I have devised for you from the top down to the tip, so that you may find it more easily than that for which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often comes to children from suckling, and when the baby spits too much water out of his head; and there is never a reply for this reason that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in adults except for those that I have seen die; and therefore, it seems to me that I should ease the treatment with a view to curing them.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child where the shoulder was swollen with water, and the head turned in every direction until he could no longer hold it up; and he believed so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture seemed to be gathered around the bone on top of the shoulder, between the collarbone and the bone; and the treatment seemed so bad that the moisture was gathered between the collarbone and the bone, and the abscesses were small, that you should make a large incision at the top of the head; and go also as far as possible, so that the moisture runs; and see the form of the sputum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are that the head of the shoulder is bent in both directions, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not return to its place: then make three incisions according to this form:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision draw out all the moisture. Then remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it there until the fifth day; then remove it, and heal the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be drawn out in equal parts, and give the patient dry meat for a little while until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at the opening of the abscess, and the angle of the blade; for it is never forward, never behind, never to the right, and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut at the opening of the abscess and the angle of the blade, and shape it according to your ability; and be careful not to block the artery; and let blood flow from the wound, so that the patient dies with pain from the blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In summary:
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "catarrh" in the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is old, and medicine does not benefit, then the following remedy is good: cauterize with what one covers the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then, after you have covered the eyes, let the patient rub his forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extract the patient's tongue completely; then look where the vein bites, and the two lines are after the ears, and they are well-defined; then mark the lines on both sides, and cut each one with an agaricle of 2 parts. as long as the saw comes to the bone, and that is done by the large side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pour out the agaricle on the artery and cover it up, cutting it also as 2 parts. above.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, so let it spring up continually without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the touch, then measure the quantity of space for iiij to iij, and sign with your hand and feel to the bone; and that which must be put out of blood is vj c/, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the refilling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone free from syphac, then strain the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	de migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	For an ancient migraine, and catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things; and it is medicinal by ways of medicine cures and all that does not benefit him, let us strain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient should let grow the hair of his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little refilled unless in some men who are too cold; and if it is refilled, then the patient's hair is torn from some drapels, and he rubs the place with any sharp drapel, and raises the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile whereof this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, and then draw it upwards towards the pincers, and remove all the threads that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then cut it with the point of the hook according to the quantity of 70 pins. For if it is not cut, then neither does it hold together in any way.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then draw the blood from the 70 pins up until 30; and if the artery is thick, then tie it with 2 strong threads of silk, so that the blood does not come out in front of the wound's healing, but goes away from the wound; and then cut off the excess between the 2 threads at that moment as well, and then, if you see it, let the cauterization be done with a knife until the bone is reached when the pins are cut; and this is the work of cauterization, if the patient does not have fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to finish off the moisture: for this is a greater aid than the moisture itself.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill up the place with fine cotton and put on tents made well; and when you remove them, let there be a cure of dry medicines that make a new birth of char, and of the tents, as much as it is healthy; and if without doubt of the artery so long as you work, then you cover it by cautery, or you employ the leach of vitriole and extract it with your hand until the stain comes out; and if you do not have this present, then put on the leach your hand until the stain is frozen, and raise the leach of cold water until the stain stops, and is extracted as it should; and that which is muedre and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with a sharp knife of 70 parts, but let the knife be well sharpened to keep it longer hot.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, so does its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	For when the instrument is too soft, so does its heat. And it must have between the .ij. tools 1 should of space, and then when you have cut off 2 of them, and you put on a sharp fire as long as it comes to the bone, and chop the vein in 2 of them; and are kept apart between the 2 chins because it is not welded by this cautery all over; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	For when the tears of the eyes are flowing out from the veins that are under the brow of the head, and it does not profit much to make medicine thereon, and you see the face of the sick person turn pale, and feel a fever come on as if it were chills; and the hair of the papers is lost, and the papers are burned by the heat of the tears, so that there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a sponge and some linen fabrics to wipe away the blood, then dip the sponge into the mixture and place it on the wound; then take the two pieces of cloth and tie them tightly around the wound with string; and keep the wound covered up; and if there is any pain, apply hot poultices to alleviate it.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the first incision which is on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the skin that is between the two incisions up to the bone, then do the same thing from the middle incision until the other second one, and then remove the mixture completely.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you bottle up the first cut of the instrument called a "culteller", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side is not sharpened at all, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the edge of the cutting tool called a "culteller" facing towards the back at the top, and the edge is smooth towards the bone, and you bottle it up until it reaches the middle cut. And chop all the vessels that descend from the top to the incision so that it continues all the way down to where it opens at the bottom, and then the other way around in the middle cut all the way down; and then remove the blood evenly, and squeeze out the vein; and then put a piece of thin cotton cloth in each cut, and cover with wet linens soaked in wine and oil and honey, and let the abscesses not come; and on the third day take off the bandages, and apply a great deal of cool water, then the cure with basilicon ointment made with oil of roses, and other cures for wounds as needed until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	to chop
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is a catarrh that has become accustomed to it, and you see the hairs hanging down and thin, and the vision blurs, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and where the head hurts most, it makes one sneeze; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from a few veins, and the cure for which one has is good if it causes this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And is that you command the patient to scratch his forehead, then make a large cut in front of it, and another from side to side. 1.. And start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he yawns; and when the bone is exposed, so soak all the blood with a sponge, and then tie cotton wool and linen over it; then put dried leaves in wine and oil on top of it, and take care not to burn the abscess; when he has been cut, then you must rub the bone until charred bones begin to come out, then cure them with drying things, which cause charring.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flower, and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds in order to cause charring everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	for the stiltiness of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that grows in ears is one of the .iiij. things: or grain, or beast, or stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, if like oats, beans, peas; or flowing thing if like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the needles, that's good; if not, instil extraction with very fine needles from a small double-edged instrument; and if it doesn't come out with those, make an air pipe and put the end of the pipe or the ear passage way firmly, and stop what is inside the pipe with soft wax so that it can't enter with the pipe; then try again, because many times it comes out like we have said; and if it doesn't come out in any way, take the gland as you take the hairs, and put some cotton inside; then press the gland on the stone or whatever it is, and try again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it doesn't come out with any of these things we have said, then quickly split the ear so that hot water comes out and spasms; and the way to split it is such that you make the first incision on the headache, and extract the blood according to its measure of virtue, then sit the headache between your hands and turn the ear up, and split a small split at the root of the ear on the grease or depending on it; and let the split be like a moon, until you feel the stone, then split it according to your power, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is stuck and swells, then extract it; and if it cannot come out, then make use of .i. a sputamile of thin substance according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and make an incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with thin tweezers and on a piece of cotton, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the water, therefore, that you pour into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use an expectorant of first order, and widely wisp the ear with old cotton. And let it sit in the ear where the fluid is. If it drips, it is good. If not, take many small stones according to the length of your finger toward the tip, and heat them slightly at the fire; and put one into the patient’s ear, and chop on another stone from the other side, and make a sound with another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to make a stone sound after another as long as the fluid comes out completely, and thus it should come out completely; and if you see, take 1.i. a piece of wood, and pour one of the chiefs into the ear, and the other chief take from the fire until the more burning piece is burned; then make another with others until the fluid comes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm, as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large one that you can feel, then make use of extraction with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to extract that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if the cure does not take place as we have described in the section on division and treatment of distillations, and if there are no worms to be seen, examine the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, hold the ear with your finger so that you can see its shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make it tight at the bottom and wide at the top. Pour in the smallest amount of oil or medicine into the ear according to how much pain the patient is in; then suck out the liquid with the whole canal; do this often until all the worms have come out. And if they do not want to come out, cut through the wax with cotton as I said in the section on cutting into stones; and if they do not rise up as we have described, administer distillations which the earlier ones have proved effective in worm extraction, and you will find them or know of them from our description of the distillation process; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, it will reveal its shape to you as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make the earplugs small at the bottom and large at the top; and for distillation, use an instrument of silver or gold; and to press the liquid down into the ear, use a silver instrument well made for this purpose, and if you have a razor, wrap cotton around its tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then pour the liquid into the cotton, and press your hand gently to speed up the distillation from the ear; and smell the patient's breath, and let the distillation be heated over a fire as you would do for an ear extraction; but keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the support of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a piercing in the ears; and this same thing happens to men due to an ear wound or a chariot falling inside the ear, and this piercing sometimes comes out completely from the ear, so that one cannot see it; and it never comes out a little, but it comes out all at once, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes out completely, so that one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many dispositions, and in this it is that you should put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the operation has completed all this spittle of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be before and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the operation is a chariot or a horn of the ear, if it holds the pinches finely, and covers it lightly, until the whole horn is osseous.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the ear is completely blocked, then take a very fine, light razor and heat it slightly, then put it at the corer of the ear. If you feel the obstruction that the patient feels grating when he hears, pierce lightly, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to its width from the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is closed, or if you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with vitriolic broilt; and if you see that the ear has drained, then cover so that you take out the tent and move another tent wet with rosin made of rose oil and wax, until the drain is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the discharge of blood comes from it, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that are made by distillation to stop the discharge of blood which are or treat with distilleries.
de la char des papieres	of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	If they are not peeled, then the fire cautery with the small, sharp cauterizer, and the cauterizer after incision is mues; and many times they return, because nothing stays in its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
de la gresle	from the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come in sheets things that seem gristle in form and hardness, and for this reason is called "grandine", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; The ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; make it large, then scorch each part lightly, then take it to the scissors, and the handle. Unless you can't cover it without piercing the paper, don't worry about the patient; and if the break is great, if the assembly has a seam, and treat it until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, because the oilmens soon restore it and cause harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the earache is going down towards the inside of the ear towards the top, then turn the eardrum, and the wax is at two points, and the wax and the scale are on one side and the other; and if the eardrum is sliced, it does not cause any harm; and when the earache is scraped, let the salty water oil be applied, and treat the area where the pain comes from until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	is made from the fat of the hairs
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to treat this is that the patient puts his or her head down on your lap; then take a sheet of linen, and set up a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of exirnach contained in each part, then put it over him; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exirnach is gathered into the circle; then make a cut of the right size in the middle of the skin, and do not make it larger than the wound at the back of the ear; and trim the skin perfectly until you come to the exirnach; and in several positions bring out the exirnach from the cut, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then a whole piece of linen cloth between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it is spread out; and be careful not to stir in the split, lest you come to all the sputum up to the oil, lest you spoil it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraction does not take place in the closing of the split, so that with an ease a little split is made until it appears; then extract as we have said, then moisten the cloth and dip it in water, and put it on its place, and extract from the bend.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such men broil silk and put it on for to corrupt that moisture which is delayed. Then the cure until it is sound. And if it comes to the base of the aposteme hot, so the cure with ointments soothing until it is sound.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper other than nature, and are dried, if they harm the eyes, and cause ways of diseases as tears used to do and softens of papers and albugine, until it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine according to what it is before, or by chapistry of cautery, and is done or by incision and suturing or by caines, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is twisted, it is good; if not, pour an needle on all the .i. thread above; and let the hair be twisted the edge of the paper or the hairs grow out from these hairs, and tie one thread above to all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut in the part of the paper, removing the hairs, at the whole larmier until the small one; then remove the thread, and put the paper a little cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an eye, as the fülle of myrtle, and all it is necessary that the figure is according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a lot of quantity of the paper necessary according to what the paper is softened; then cut on all the spatumile above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great larmier until the small one; and let it be a split near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour the oil in one of the two angles of the cure, then burn it all; then assemble the two lips to a stitch of an needle on all the fine thread, and wash the blood, and make air to the superfluity of the threads above the two sorcilz on all glues things, if you see to do this; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the stitch and the threads until 1.3 days or 2.3; then treat the wound without stitch of drying and constricting things, for the paper relaxes at the burning of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is wet (if they would say the ancient), and this is workings without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a figure which is so like to the fennel of myrrh, as we have told, at .iiij. times you shall reverse according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut who rises up little by little evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not even, take an awl or there is .i. thread, and the bottle the figure; and bottle another .i. thread of fine thread, and the second small, and assemble between your two threads evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the leather where you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the 2 lips of the wound by suture, and calm it with cerotic and similar emollients;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and no time passes that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	"If it delays, if the copes force, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is sealed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the  .ij. bites that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:"
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The ovraiges are such that you squeeze out a fine needle, and bottle  1 fil of silk and fine thread; then join the ends and tie them finely, and make the length of the threads a palm long; then order in the chase 1 other fil of fine silk, and tie the ends together; then put the patient's chief in your hand; and be careful to shade the ovraiges from the sun, for they are very fine ovraiges, then bottle the needle in all the chase at the root of the hair as it is drawn out on top of the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the chase, and bottle that hair in the chase, if there is 1 or 2 or more; then pull your hand until the hairs come out entirely in the paper with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased, treat and let the hairs grow out with it; pull the chase all along that you have ordered, until the chase comes out of the pit above and you see it by the vision of oil; then if you pull the chase and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed 18 or 20 days, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from nature, and let them be lifted with that or leave them, until they are stretched and then let them down.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or porritus, comes in the oil, it has two ways: one is natural and the other is un-natural. It comes through sudden wound, or scar, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to work on this disease is that you split that wound, and free the lips of it, and put linen inside, and leave it until it heals; and do not use anything in its cure that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the water or wine of ale and linseed are cooked, and olive oil is added to it, and wrap it up, and cure it like this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure, if you keep it in mind that she does not harden according to the form that she was before; and the remedies that we have said are only good for a while after this disease, that she does not return according to the form that she was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease, which is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accidental part comes from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige in this case is that you should take an awl, with its double point, and pierce it through the left temple as far as possible, so that the point goes into 1/4 of the char (skull); then place the char on top of the awl, and a large chisel-shaped cope.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper back on, and make 1/4 of cuts or costings within the paper; and let the chisels of the 1/4 cuts come out of the angles of the incision that you have copped, and let be made one angle so that when they are put together, that the figure is like the figure of a letter that has none "griesche" (cross); then put back this char, according to the quantity that its costes are agus desoz, from that which ensueth the paper, then add the 1/4 parts of the cut, and join them together with a thread of wool; then make the cure of what we have said about medicines that soften, and of tents, until he is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, il convient que tu fendes une fendure plaine entre les poils des papieres, et selon ce qui est ci-devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j'ai dit; et doit on faire l'ovraige selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres apparelle engien de tout son pooir comment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et le malade meisme, selon ceu qu'il i convient d'ovraige et d'estrumens em plusors dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And if the disease comes from a wound or a stitch or a cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clear incision between the hairs of paper, and according to what is said above; then deseve between the 19 leathers of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in shape, and the master healers apparelle without limit of all their power how to restore the figure to its natural shape; and the sick man himself, according to what he is convenient for ovraige and instruments in several dispositions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound comes in such a way that the paper above it is sewn with oil white, and cannot move or make its ovraige naturely, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, as long as you cut what is at the tip of the subtile spatumil, which should not be too sharp or too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp spatumil that bleeds the oil; and let your incision, from which you strip the assembled paper, be light, so that the paper revives according to its natural shape; and all that is assembled is healed, and never uses in acidic salt water, and soft water, and colier; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of flax, and put wool soaked in abundance of ale on the oil; and after three days use of the colier and things that mend it as long as it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Saiches that the nail is according to 1.3 ways: it is nervous and resembles a hard dry syphill, and another that is not nervous but resembles white congelate moisture, which, when touched with iron and rubbed with pinches, cannot be moved; and both appearances begin to grow towards the great tear, and increase little by little until it covers all the vision, all the light, and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then he opens the nails; and lift the paper to your hand, then coil the nail with small twists, and place it above; then take a needle, and put on it 1.1 hair of horse, or of she-goat, or of bull, and 1.1 strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce it through the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and place it above, and peel off at all the nail the skin which comes out to the prunella and the silk on the nail jusc'up to the head, then cut away the remaining in the root of the tear with the subtle tear of nature, so that by the incision does not come the blood as is usually custom; and never are the nails tied with a single knot and thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin and the silk which comes out with the hair.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the skin does not touch the wool and tear it, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of olive, and of colier made of alum, and leave it until the other day; then cure him of what he needs until he is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncing will not enter, this form of uncing with medicines is often cured; and they are born as I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, so do the oil of the sick, and take the light powder according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And pull the nail up slowly, and if you see that it is not diminishing at all and the pain increases, then distill from your mouth into the oil of the collar made of slate and red oil and seaweeds, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again with this same work, as long as it is whole.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is opposed to you in the oil, as if it were an abscess, then take milk, and first cure the abscess as healthy as possible, and then begin again with this same work, as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the armpit is opposed to you in the oil by great harm, if it is suspended on the neck, and you take a part of it and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distill into the oil of the collar made of slate.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the horse which was born from the eye of the apricot tree
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	of the horse which was born red from the eye of an apricot and wrapped in paper and restrained at the back and seemed like a rose of a baobab; and the work is such that the patient puts his head on your shoulder, then he twists the hairs, and twists all of them like the hooks suitable for this, and holds it firmly; then chop off the first hair, and go all the way to the razor blade until the end, and be careful not to cut oil into the work; and let the incision with the spatumil that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces by which one rubs the foot, as the form after this chapter shows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is completed and all the hair has been removed, then employ the oil of sesame or you distill red wine and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put cotton thread over the oil at the back with abnin of ufe, so that it is assured against an abscess; and if it does not wait, and the horse mounts you without shoes, and you doubt about an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing medicines for an abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way make the hair fit into the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the limbs are suffering from this work.
des voines des eulz	the hairs of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	the hairs of the eyelids are red because they are covered with oil, and it is through this oil that the eyelid's work and its power to keep the eye strong decrease day by day. It is therefore necessary that at the first sign you look at the eyelid, so that you can see whether it is swollen or not, and there is no other disease in the eye apart from the eyelid; therefore, here is how to treat it: instruct the patient to place his or her brow in your hand, then gently lift up the eyelids completely according to his or her wisdom, and make each lid twice as long according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two eyelids by degrees in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then carefully stretch out the eyelids slightly, and rinse the oil with cold water after another hour, until you see the eyelids move away from the oil; and be careful not to splatter the oil on the tips of the eyelids, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you don't split the oil; and when you have done this, let it be distilled into oil with green and red wine so that it corrupts what is delayed by the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have no power to bind all this together in that hour, then make a paste on oil of things which calm the pain of the hairs and leave it for some days as long as the pain is calmed and secured by an abscess of heat, then begin again according to this way which is above until he is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirrour says so alone: 'Arising' fistula: when you cure it by cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut on the abscess, where it must die, and carry out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then reset all the instruments where it is; and is called 'aspre chief', and shall be made from a chief of fire to another chief of fire, and shall be pointed so as a file so that it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place of the bone that has decayed, and turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that corruption is removed; and do this not again, then restore the place of drying medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is souded and does not respond to heat, and if the shell of the bow is souded, and remains so for ten days, and it does not improve and there are no bad accidents; then know that he is well, except for a fistula, which must be brought to the surface according to this method: therefore you uncover the bone the second time with fire, and with medicines, and when it is uncovered, then take it. If it was a case of fire, then make the head of the shoulder three angles wide, and let the edge be blunted until it reaches the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put the fire on the bone with the knife, and keep your hand away from the oil a little, then turn all the fire over until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels pain at this place if he holds his hand over his nose; and then restore the place of drying medicines, as I have taught you, and when the heat has come and hardened the bone, if the matter goes to the nose; so is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Here is the translation of the text:
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	"For when the hairs are completely removed, and there is no risk that it will move or get caught, then you may trim the hair; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow."
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have a good appearance, then pierce them with a very thin spike that comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture-white algue and cut the hairs, and come in so often; then extract them until they are well.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowl of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only due to the bowl that is mixed with oil, resembling water descending, and yet is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the ovary so that you place the patient on it in a sitting position and straight, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and move it up and down while you see the oil come to the top of your hairs; then remove it until it is completely dry, and do not run water over it, or it will become wet again; and if it does not come off, know that it is water, and the removal of the bowl is done as we have said. If you place the patient in a sitting position between your hands, then take the very thin spike and pierce it into the scalp so that it comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture-white algue and cut the hairs, and come often; then extract them until they are well.
des aigues de l’oil	from the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation of the text:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, and when the second stream of oil rises again, apply the instrument with force, and when it is firmly in place and does not rise anymore, gently remove 'almagda' by turning your hand from side to side; and then put a little gem-oil into the hole, and leave it there. Then put some dried oil or water into a bowl, and dip the oil into it, and mix with healthy oil. We, and those who are with us, shall throw dust with much powder.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If 'almagda' cannot enter the oil due to its thickness, as there are some people whose hairs are too thick, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so, here is the translation of the text:
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	"Here is the next sentence:
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	"Here is the next sentence:
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the shapes of the alchimiest, so that he who knows them not may see them; and let them be of pure brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of this middle substance be of water, and the behind in three angles dry.
de la char sor le neis	of the earth under the sky
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There are various types of horses or donkeys that seem to be scorpions at the feet of the stars; and if there is one of such a horse or donkey that has a strong scent, and if it has a black color, then you should make the sick person sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and sprinkle this subtile essence on those horses, and force them; then take what you can bear at the sputum of the subtle substance from one side, as long as you know that this horse is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if the opening is completely open.i. of the instruments that are subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and without you go up, or an abscess foot, if the secort it is as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sin is dried up and all the pus has been expelled, then get water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the sore is opened and moisture comes out, knowing that it is well; and if the moisture does not perforate as it should, knowing that there is pus in the bone above, so that the instrument does not cut it: then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and tie it with hands, and space it 1/4 inch or less between each; and make the patient insert the thread into his nose at power, and pull it out smelling it frequently until it comes out through his nose into his mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the thread that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other thread that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and cut them off together while holding them as we are doing with the thread; do this as long as you know that the thread has corrupted that pus, then pull the thread, wash the blood, and dip it in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the nose as before; do this for 3 days or more, as long as the ointment corrupts what is delayed of pus; and then put a cord of plonk on the nose for some days until he is well, and if there is need of dried medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purge the nose, whereon we distil oils and medicines or nasas:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a cord; and if you see, then make a closed cord, and let the instrument rest in the nose; and if you see, then make 1/4 inch long pieces of cord, and tie them at each end so that they do not slip; and hold them both together while you heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder pain over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	of the shoulder pain over the neck Many times the chief of the neck causes a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it is visible to the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and burn all the bone, then put fire on it; and if one delays to cover it so long as it is large, see if it is hard, of pale color, of poor feeling: if not touch it with iron because it is an abscess engorged, for when one covers it once, much harm comes to the patient; and the abscess is of soft touching, not of pale color, and you see that one can cover it all, if he cuts it without fear, and cures the place with dry and binding things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	when solutions of continuation come in one of these ovraige cartilages, he profited little, rather than in some men. It is necessary therefore that when this happens to any man, if he sees that the wound is fresh, and regards it; and then ajoste the iij. lips at a joint, and then cures him as long as he remains sane; and if the lips are cut on one side or the other, so that you scorch all the parts of their flesh as long as they heal, then assemble the iij. lips at a joint, and binds them, and grinds dragon's blood and incense, and puts it on powder after powder of dragon's blood, and incense broied; and lays on the powders a piece of plaster of fer or other plaster then lets it drip as long as it oozes, and cures it with ointment as long as it is sane.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to stitch together a wound so that you join the solution together: or by needles, as we have said in stitching up the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	the lips become hard, resembling grain of sand, smaller and larger; then cover them, and split each one, and pick it up with tweezers and place it in a container; then employ the vitriolic poultice at that place after the wound has been cleaned, until the blisters have dried out; and then remove them.
de la char des gencives	the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maitres naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent albulus; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restaignans et desiccatives; et s'celle char retourne aprés l'incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne retourne mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens pour coper.
des sordens	Here is the translated text:
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	"Many times, are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, teeth that are ugly and rough; and many times are the tooth black and yellow and rotten, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth stinking; if it seems right that you should hold the bad one between your hands, and its roots are in your hand, and remove the teeth or the escarres that appear, as long as it does not stay anything; and thus do of blackness and whiteness, and of yellowness and other stains, until they are all gone; and if one that is pulled begins again to grow on the second day and third, as long as you have them all removed; and know that the teeth must be re-planted with different shapes of instruments according to what the work demonstrates, for what the razors that remove the teeth from between them have other shapes than those with which they are planted between the gums; and these shapes and others be prepared with you."
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary for you to treat a toothache as soon as possible because it should not be delayed at all; for this is a very high-quality substance up to the point where there is no excuse for not drawing it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	So it is when the patient is forced to draw out the tooth that you must be certain of the painful tooth; often the pain ends in the healthy tooth, and one thinks that it is the healthy tooth which needs to be drawn out; and yet, we have often done this for those gentlemen; and when you are certain about the painful tooth, so it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a sharp instrument; then place it in your hand or with fine pliers at one hole after another until it is well loosened, then tighten the pliers well; and let the patient's jaw rest between your knees, and hold it firmly.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Then draw out the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and push it in from all sides lightly, and move it as you did before; and if the tooth is stuck and hurts, so it is necessary that you fill it with strips, where the break is; and if it is pulled gently with pliers, so it is necessary to pull it out slowly; and it is necessary to cut carefully around the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do well to take care that you do not break it, and if a part remains, and leave it to the patient by the malice of the root with greater pains than in the first. And take care that you do not do this as does that ignorant doctor, who, through his haste and arrogance, often breaks the carriage without any consideration; but instead, bring it about by the cause of that great disease at the roots or by the carriage which he breaks, just as we have often done; and when the tooth is drawn out, so wash the place with wine or astringent and water; and remove the pain with cold water, for often this comes. And if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick limbs so that they do not bend when drawn, and be of good iron made, and have teeth for holding fast.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root of the tooth moves when drawn, so that you put cotton and oil in the socket for a day or two until the roots are smooth, then squeeze the pliers which are called "algefri", whereof the head looks like an adz; and be made inside as a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must take off the whole hook around the root, and put the instrument that is called "al-thalī", that is to say, a mallet, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be far and large so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through it, this is good; if not, then help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has .ij. rains, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the reasoning of the dens, and of this instrument which seems like a great pair of pliers, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Et soit cist estrumens fors qu'il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d'estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d'autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n'enseignerent point d'estrument por la diversiteit d'aus et s'om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu'il i covient, que je t'ai dit, et t'aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be sturdy and good for holding the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold and remove it; and then return it to its place with medicines that are suitable for him, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then the surgery has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with nature and its form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the root of the tooth is beyond the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed; then cut it out, and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose form is as follows: It is made of iron and is shaped like a small knife.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut the meat and cut it little by little because of the pain in the teeth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is seen that we can grind it, we should grind it like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And is also like the grinding of which we make needles; and grind the tooth little by little gently so that it does not move until it breaks; then, at the end, very lightly with any rasp, and the hard part is too sharp and bleeds the tongue, so we should grind the grit so that it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or destroy speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth breaks
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth breaks, either by pounding or by pulling, and the patient cannot press upon anything he chews, and you have cured them with restringent medicines, but it does not help; then, to restrain it with a gold thread, because silver wire turns green and rusts, but gold never moves; and take the wire thin or thick enough according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain on one side, take the file and double it between the 16 teeth on that side, then put the file between the 16th tooth and the sound tooth next to it, and fit it so that it does not bleed the tongue; and then, keep your hand steady and carefully cover it until it is tight; and if it looses, or the thread rips, take another thread. If it holds for a long time, and serves in this way throughout its length, and is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the file when the 16 teeth are fitted together, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is loose, if one puts it back in its place little by little, as we have said; and let no one meddle in this who is not skilled and suffering, and never make the shape of a tooth of bone, and put it back in its place where it fails, and hold it fast as we have said, and delay and maintain thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to take away the copper from the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No one should remove the copper from the tongue or nature it out, for it is not good to do so; or, by accident of a sore sore, and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person and place his head in your lap, and take the tongue; then take away the nerves of the large, as much as the tongue is loosened from its place, and if there is pain or no, it is from the wound of a sore, so you bite it with a hook and take away the nerves; and watch that the cut is not too perfect, lest the artery be stopped. And when night comes, let the leech take care of the sore, so that the leach does not stick to it.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see any black or dark color or hard place on it, so that the patient does not smell it, nor touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it declines to blench, and there is moisture, then pour the water, and make a fine paste, and deliver it from both sides; and if he comes to your work, put him on the vitriolic broil as long as it is dry, then return to your work until you have done all of it; then lift the leach of water and tar, and cure of other cures as long as he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the abscess of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	from the abscess of the throat come what are called "godath", and they are called properly the .ij. mandrels, and when you cure them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and red color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is big, do not touch it with iron for fear of bloodshed; but leave it until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would burst by itself; and if it is a pale color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is hot and calm. Then make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in your hand, and let him press the tongue against all the instrument, so that this is the form; and be of silver or fine gold as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Then make the patient press his or her tongue against all of the instrument, and see if you can feel the abscess; then take the oar and put it in the mandrel, and lift it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with it, but cover the instrument, from which this is the form, which looks like a strong bar; and yet the head is curved, and one end above the other, and are very sharp, and are made of iron or an oar:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, if you cover it with pliers, from which this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be careful on one side and the other; and when you have chopped one of the Mandragoras, chop the other according to this same method, and after incision gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and easy water, and let go if there is any pain, if gargarism with water, or with cooked pomegranate juice, or with fern leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then cure him as long as he is well; and never give him other abscesses in the throat than the .ij. Mandragoras, if they are chopped in the same way as these.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, that is to say, one small abscess; and I closed the whole throat very well so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for even one day or two; and the abscess was so high that it had risen 1.5 inches on either side of the throat openings where they were swollen. So I waited a little while, and then put a tiny piece of sharp stone in one of the openings, then drew it out quickly, and put another piece of stone in another opening, and pressed the woman's tongue; after that I put the sharp stone in those abscesses, and some of them was cut off, and only a little pain came; so the passage in the woman's throat was unblocked, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting that abscess for a long time; and the abscesses were beginning to heal again, and filled up the place that I had emptied before, until it was very big; then I bound it and cauterized it inside her throat: so the pain stopped; and I left those parts, and there is nothing but God did for me afterwards.
de l’uve	from the wine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the head is numb and cold, and it is dislocated and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called an "eye". When it has been treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the chaps of the abscesses are calm and thin, so it is necessary that you cut them; and those who are round and rounded and not too far away; and they are bloody or a certain color or black, so it is necessary that you avoid cutting. For there is great danger in this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, that it is numb and far away, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have spoken of above; then stick the oncose in the eye, and twist it, and cover it with .i. 12 instruments that I have said in the incision of .i. 10 Mandors. And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .i. 10 Mandors, and heal until he is well. And if the patient has a fear of covering, it is necessary that you use an instrument for cauterizing him when he feels pain. The way to cauterize is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses his tongue against the instrument which we have spoken of, or the fire-cauterizer, and mixes with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too thin; and use the handle of this instrument, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the head have a hair that the medicine is put on, as if with a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he swallows and his saliva runs into the medicine from his mouth, so that it does not go down the throat and the wound; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye for half an hour, as much as you see him grow weak and the medicine's bites are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument full of cotton at the back of the nose, as long as the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and wash after 2 or 5 days. And if you need to refresh the cauterization of the medicine, let it be refreshed, and after the cauterization rinse with cold water until he is well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than the incision or cauterization. If it has been treated by smoking according to this manner, take calamus and ysop and oregano and rue and chamomile and awern and similar herbs, and put them all together in a pot, and pour water into it easily, and let it boil; and the pot is well sealed with strong clay, and place the pot on 1 instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And be of silver or gold, and be one of the heads crushed in the mouth of the patient until the vapour rises to the vein through the vein, until the vein is hardened; then it begins again, often, until the vein dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess, for many things have happened; and do not make this but at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a vein and put a hook of urine in it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the hook of urine does not burden the vapour in the mouth, and this is good treatment together for salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there comes to the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so it is necessary that you draw what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if it does not open for you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this thing comes out by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of bread-crust; and fasten the sponge with a string, and then swallow it; and when she comes to the place, if she squeaks, pull hard; and if she does not come hard from this that we have said, take a plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And be the instrument curved at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and has the end raised higher; and keep that you do not touch the epiglotte, that all does not come out to her, nor push the bone in; and move that the patient swallows the instrument, because he will move or the thing comes out; if she swallows it, or pulls it hard with all the instrument, as long as she is pulled.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Here is the first sentence of the text translated into English:
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Here is the translated text:
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	Here is the first sentence of the text translated into English:
li chapistres des apostemes	the cauterization of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The passage mentions two methods of treating abscesses: one involves piercing and the other involves cutting. The first method is applied when the abscess is in the center of an area, while the second is used for those located at the edges or in joints. Each method has its own specific approach based on the nature and location of the abscess.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If an abscess needs to be pierced without causing pain, it should be left until it has completely healed; and if it is a case of an abscess that needs to be pierced when it is still painful, it should be done carefully so as not to damage the surrounding areas or the nerves. For if an abscess is located in a joint and left untreated, there is a risk of the joint becoming damaged and deformed. On the other hand, if an abscess is located in a primary limb, piercing it before it has completely healed may cause damage to that limb. Similarly, if an abscess is located in a fundament - a supporting structure - and is pierced without allowing for complete healing, it may become chronic and form a fistula; this could lead to long-term issues and prevent proper healing. Therefore, it is important to wait until the abscess has healed completely before piercing it to ensure optimal outcomes and minimize potential complications.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is important to consider the timing of piercing an abscess to ensure optimal patient care. The ideal time for piercing an abscess is when the pain has subsided, there is a decrease in fever, and the redness, swelling, and itching have diminished; when there are no more boils or pustules, and the lump has become less tender and smaller in size; and when there is no longer any discharge or pus. The perforation should be performed at the preferred location for the abscess, whether it is on the surface or deeper, at the site of its opening, and along the long axis of the abscess, whether it is on the hand, foot, or other body part, including joints and nerves.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases of pain, following the order of the limb. And when abscesses are in their natural position, as it has been said, if you pierce them before they are completely digested, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you pull along the course of its coming out, and there is much dirt; and perhaps the lips harden and its bottom hardens. And if any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many wounds according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses need to be sewed up and covered up, as we have said, and when they have become as hard as a .i. drapelz, and are softened, it is necessary to do as one does with bubles: and if there are any that are split in .iij. angles, and if there are any that one covers like the skin of myrrh, as abscesses of the legs; and if there are any that one makes into a circular shape, and other shapes and apparently covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is a burning of the skin due to sanc, let there be cold water and quickly, and dip 1.i. drapes, and put them over the burning place many times. And if the burning persisten
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what it means:
des soros	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Here is the translated text:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like  "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like,  "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	of scrofula
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put vinegar broth or some powder that stops up blood on it, and strain the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the scrofula at the root has healed somewhat, if there are any small scrophulas, then cut them off and clean them out. And if there is a large root of a scrofula in the vein, it only needs that you cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without causing any harm; then bind the wound with cotton dipped in ointment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut off all the scrofula, then you should gather the two lips of the wound and sew them together now, without letting there be any excess by the size of the scrofula. If it needs that you tie the root tightly, and draw it hard, and sew it as we have said above. Those scrophulas that hold excess, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, and then put in its place with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is delayed from corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, then heal it with ointment with a patch.
de squinance	de squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	the ancient ones said and spoke of the lengthening of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and that is the scriptural word of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the fending of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be taken out; and one should not seek help from anyone for this, since all the veins and the membrane of the disease are in the mouth or in the throat or in 1.2 amandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the obstruction which comes from strangulation does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore when we want to split the epiglottis that we do it desoz.iij. circles or iiij. a small split across, between the iij. circles or by the quantity of the split through the syringeum, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if they are suitable for cutting the epiglottis then there is no need for a chisel, and the vessel is long for this;
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, so that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, then split the meat as far as it comes to the windpipe; and avoid the vessels of blood, because you see nothing, and then cut through the syringeum, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is shown by the section of the windpipe that jumps out by the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by when one doubts about strangulation, join the .ij. lips of the wound around both sides of the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause a good flow, until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: Don't do this just yet, until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect disappears.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	And then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through the wound, and thus is kept from dying; and in this way.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and so the elder should let the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iiij.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to stitch the wound and heal, until she was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw;
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took .i. knife, and put it in her throat, and went into the woods by the pond;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure him, and I found him also as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had issued from it, and I saw that it had not yet broken a vein but had run only into the throat, and the venes were running with blood through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it as well as I could;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the young woman had only a red throat, and returned to her usual self.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for if I had known that in the surgery of the epiglottis there would be fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	is called "hernias of the throat", and is a great apoplexy in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no trouble.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And these accidents occur according to two ways, of which one is similar to fat coming from us, and the other way is similar to an abscess coming from us due to arteriovenous fistula.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it is not good to operate fire on one who has little fever, but he proves and seeks all the external matter:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you recognize it as well as fat comes to us, and does not help at all, if it is cut, as we cut ourselves, and treat it with all its hair, if there is any:
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and treat it as needed, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of the
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that exists between "us" and "it".
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that  "it" is hot and fiery, until the沸騰 has passed, and is completed; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new nostrum there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is its own sack and according to the color of the flesh, and begins also like a nut, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of all in color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the cure of the nostrum, you must first test and inquire about all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the paste which follows it.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of the examination of abscesses is that you squeeze or the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has penetrated into the pus, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the instrument for inser
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture runs quickly, that it be colored, then do as I said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument there is no moisture, know that it is fat, then do so in a cross shape, and take it between the pincers, and skin it lightly on each side and watch where it lies, so you get it healthy with the note;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot get it healthy, take it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if I do not delay, it returns to us again and again;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little time, and without causing you any grief, so employ the wound with some corrosive water, and draw out the wound, and put on things that soothe the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is well;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if we take a lot of time, so cut the wound with the 3 fingers, and treat it with that which causes pain;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if we are in a hurry and employ the place of vitriole with broyment, and let it stay there 3 or 4 days as long as the wound pus, and then return to the copper which has been delayed with fire;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See here the forms of intruding instruments, and there are three kinds: large and medium and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles used for sorcery, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those which are white are more proven in soundness than the black ones to surround the cavities of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they are of three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the needles are of various sizes, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also needles with three quarters of different sizes.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if one has three coronets, and are also of three ways; and if one has two coronets, and one corona only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these is to be sharp, and of such I have who only cut from one side, so that we scorch the nose, so that we do not chop the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these insertions are the alems replied in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see them.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use one more than one part because it is in place, as legs, arms, breasts, and hands, and similar parts;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make another instrument small, resembling to knots of fists, according to this form, so that it is burned with fire:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it never in the place that heals well next to veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and never inflame the breasts of some men when they become corrupted, as much as they seem to be breasts of a woman;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they will remain laid up and swollen, and those who will cure them, if it is necessary according to this form from this line b. until:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then peel the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with char, then sew together the 19 lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and then let it suck up a little milk, and make it soft by its size, so that it looks like women's breasts, and cut them into 19 pieces above, with 19 similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of which one is held to the other at the end of the first and of the second, so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this form, from this line b. until the line g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin that is between the 19th and 20th lips, and remove the fat, and I will add what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	And if it is not healed, or the incision is not yet completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton swabs dipped in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the remnant and fat are dry, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The pustules that come from hard sores or it has ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: . . .
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, if he employes wet cotton and leaves it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and cure with an ointment appropriate to it until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess has appearances of sores, if he does as we have said before in cutting sores, and if the wound is a bowel, then apply the fire cautery as we have described.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is torn and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses form, as well as an abscess coming to the surface and an abscess
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one digs into it early when it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long and complete.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel stretching; and when it is for the vein, if you feel pain suddenly.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and that is a folly to burn this abscess, and most when it is dislocated the elbows and at the neck and in mouth of others and is very big.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be avoided, and in that which swells an artery cut the skin from above long;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the waist as one would on a horse, and separate the artery from the tissue carefully, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then pull out a needle and make it go through almost to the other side of the coast, and hold the artery with a double thread of thread in  .ij. lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the .ij. arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then point out the place that is between the 17th rib of an intramuscular injection until the sinning comes out from it, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	And provide care with a bow until the sinew swells.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And treat what comes with what is used for it until it is well.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is at the base of the neck, then you should hold it with your hand so that you can touch it to all the skin, and
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then pour the wine from the skin that you hold in your hand, and let it flow out, and there is .i. thread of two twists, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread of one of the two sides to the two threads;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then put another needle on all of the thread at the incision of the first needle, and strip the threads in four lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the excess off of the apotheosis as much as possible, then cut the surplus of the two and leave what remains tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then cover it with wet cloth in wine and oil, and then bring him remedies for tents and onions until he is well.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	And so do the abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, they come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the joints and the limbs, and the two are joined, and their color seems to be the color of the flesh, and they are in many conditions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and is not fully cured of the course, but goes back to the cure.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and be well sealed from all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and that which is in joints does not come together with iron: perhaps it will contract.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is at the top or at the front, make the skin with the spatule.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the apoptesis is small, if it has one tenaille, and copes it by its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the hang-up is at the root, and the scorching, then the bone is broken and the wound is sewn up, and let it be healed until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	large mouths hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No time comes in belly and not another place thelulu, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of mold, and is the subtle root, and the large tree; and there are small and many big ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw. There was one home who had 1 . i . or stomachs that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I measured them and found one to be 25.8 ounces heavy, and the other 6.9 ounces, and the work of the incision is such that you see that the patient is moistened, and the color of the articu
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if it copes with the spatemile wide, and are in your presence the fire cautery. For in the surgeon there is often too great a loss of blood, and he goes away from you, so hurry then to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient in anticipation and afraid of the iron incision, so take a well-made string of ply, and tie the artikul as we have said, and leave it for .i. days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then the restraint, and do not cease to remove the string of ply as long as it copes with the artikul, and cut through it; and if the roots are thick, so have fear at the copery itself for the belly, but you please well copery the half,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize it so it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep from covering the frothy blood that is poor in sense and rich in milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the cure for leprosy below.
quant li boude ist fuer	how much the sweat is
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	For the appearance of sweat comes from a fire cautery or an incision in a sore or wound, and it is on the belly and there are some of the sweats, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the syrup and by the issue of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opening of various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed to its two sides so that it turns, and then returns, and perhaps it is caught, and grows larger at the entrance of the bath, and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, then it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then open it according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is by wind, then it is at the top of the thigh, and the work is that you look at its appearance, whether it is from the artery, or the vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you let the cure take place. For there is doubt and fear, if as I have said, you coat the abscesses with this paste, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, if it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dye his hair, and be stretched out completely flat, then sign all around the bowels.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct him to go slowly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the place that you have signed with all of your skin,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then are the half of the aposteme on top of all the long nail.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie a strong thread or rope of fine silk firmly around it, and let us fasten it tight;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then extend the half of the aposteme over the thread, and put your index finger on it, and feel the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you feel that it is caught in the thread, and if it comes loose, then feel the intestine at the far end of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, if it takes hold of the skin, and cut off the surplus.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery hurts or bleeds, go inside and take .iij. needles, and thread .iij. fils, and tie the needles around what you have made to pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch out the abscess over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave it to fester until it is rotten, and cut off what is dead from itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or cut when it is thin and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the blood or moisture that you find then cure the joint of what it touches, and weld the joint.
dou chancre	the gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of the appearances of gangrene, and how one should act with medicines, and how one should treat with iron; and we say that gangrene is found in the breast and in the loins, and great care must be taken in its treatment, and the ancient one says that when gangrene is in a good place where it can be cut like gangrene in melons, and in the curry, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is small; and when it is large and old, then it should not be approached, for I have never found one who has been cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the overtures, when they are in a place where they can be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge the black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then afaited the bile.i. good place for making the overture; then throw your scabs or gangrene, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the juice well in your hand or in any thing, and if it comes to an incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize until the blood is stopped; then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	about dropsey
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	about dropsey
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	give the patient a good deal of water, and press it into his belly at the lowest part of the loins, then take the spatulum with thorns according to this form: And let it be pointed in two parts, and let it not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when it is inserted, and cannot cut it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look to see if the dropsy is passing into the intestines: it is necessary that you split it up to the bottom of the loins on both sides straight with your finger; and if the dropsy is by disease of the liver, then is your split at the left side of the loins; and if it is by pus, then at the right side, and it is only necessary that the patient lie down upon the split so that the surplus may not run to that weak leath:
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and draw your hand back from all the spatula between the skin and the medicine as when scraping off a quantity of wax or resin; then pierce the medicine until the spatula comes to rest on the wet surface, and this is the place of the water, then polish it well, and pour this instrument out of which there is the shape: And it seems like an agile silver wire, and is made of bronze or light copper, and has in the center .i. a small hole; and costs one part, .iij. holes on one side; two parts, and one on the other; and the head is cut so as to form a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes use to make their feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the alemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, now pour it into the instrument; empty half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than this at that time, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will hit his palm, or approach death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but pour the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its pouls mean; then polish the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the kernel that stops up the hole on the medicine, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from this, and pour a small quantity of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.
de l’estopement de la verge	Do not cut off the foreskin of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Do not cut off the foreskin of the penis, or if there is a small foreskin, or it is not in its place: If it comes to do so that it does not pierce at all, make a very thin cap out of this form: then put on the cap and fasten it with 2 or 3 knots, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, as urine flows through it, and then remove it; and by chance there is no covering at all, because the urine that comes out is not enough to cover it.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Do not cut off the foreskin of the penis if it is small, or if it is not in its place: If it comes to do so that it does not pierce at all, make a very thin cap out of this form: then put on the cap and fasten it with 2 or 3 knots, and leave it for 2 or 3 days, as urine flows through it, and then remove it; and if there is no covering at all, because the urine that comes out is not enough to cover it. If the foreskin is small, it will become larger, as we have said, if it is tied up. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are burned, for no child has the foreskin on the tip of the penis, since he cannot urinate until his penis is raised; and he cannot impregnate a woman unless the material comes out between her legs.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et li maniere de l'ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d'une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s'il avient, si l'estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu'il soit sanez.
des pustules de la verge	And the manner of this operation is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are to be made as thin as the width of a feather, so that when the penis enters it does so easily; and beware of the escape of blood, which often happens, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with the same substance, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times a kind of itch comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are bad and good things; so that you should extract them with a fine hook, and cut and clean them well, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure it with diafinicon until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the itch is malicious, of color and putrid, then you should extract it with a hook; when you have cut it, and the itch is in the peirce of the penis, and part of it is inside the flesh and part outside, then you should take out the itch that is inside first; and when it is closed, then cure it from the outside. For when you cure it all together, unless it is securely sewed up, then blackness and corruption come to its penis and where it goes; so you should extract all that is black and corrupted, then put it on a plaster of honey and flour which has been made of the skin of pomegranates and times, and then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And when blood runs away, if you apply the lunar cautery as follows: The cauteries should assist in these two dispositions together: that is, with the running of blood and corruption; and if the foreskin is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is appropriate that you either stick or conduct a cord of pluck on the foreskin, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair rises on the head of the foreskin to those who have not yet been circumcised, or where there is an injury or abscess, then it is appropriate that you scald it with one instrument as much as the ligaments are loosed, and the foreskin is completely released from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a difficult thing to devise this, then it is appropriate that you scald with one spittle at the top of the foreskin and the skin; then loosen very well between 1 and 2, and put a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water, so that it does not rise again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not dislocated by continuing if it is like the other wounds; However, when we do this work of our own will, and especially on infants, it is appropriate that we do the best work and the lightest work for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old people did not speak about circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have heard the greatest part of the masters and the worthy men who did circumcision upon me. They were strong and had all kinds of novelties; but perhaps if one should cut it off, he would hurt himself, because there are 1.2 threads, and by chance if one cuts him on top and delays it
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or if he recovers it, the pain is double, and the washing that comes from the member is not completely assured; and by chance the nail falls off, and corrupts the work, and many times it happens that one does not need washing and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the washing that is done to all the threads I have found the goodness of experience, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly all around; but let the thread be well-made around the skin; and so let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you are not making him tightly tied to the pole as much as possible, and then please him in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then lay it straight between your hands, and pull the threads together between your hands so that the child does not see them, neither any of the instruments; then put your hand to the pole and blow or curry, and turn it upside down as much as the pole's joint is in place; then clean it well of the filth which is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie again 1 .i. another thread; and hold it at the second knot to the thong and little finger, and tie between the two threads, then lift up the curry gently and turn the head of the pole;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let it run little by little, for that is the way of healing; and put powder on and above the powder 1  .i. a cloth dipped in a mixture of dried rosewater, mixed with good oil and fresh butter, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with other cures as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force in cleaning is this: the two joints should be loose and well-cut, and the joints should be as even as possible;
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it is three days and the swelling of the foreskin is still present, if you let the skin around it heal, and then lightly peel it off; if you can move it, and keep away from the part of the foreskin, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For external wounds, we have described a treatment for powders in the treatment of powders, and if applied excessively, it may go up; but it will not harm him; treat him then, as we have said, until he is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	To treat dou retention of urine:
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retened urine is of stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or chaff, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	If the urine is not passed, and you see that the stone is in the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; let them put the foot on their back, and extend their belly from above their back, and restrain the patient so that he can sit as well as he can; and then the base of the bladder is constrained to express the stone above, so that the urine passes.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should bring an instrument called a "syringe", which has this shape: and it should be of fine lightweight silver, like the feathers of an owl; and its pipe should be a palm long and half wide, and fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the end of a piece of wool or cotton yarn, and bottle the end of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the surplus of the wool and bottle it up to the end of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and vagina with oil moistened with olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	And then lightly insert the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the base of the penis, and then double the penis over against the bowel; then pour the syringe up to just before the bladder, and let the urine go out to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except that it goes where it wants to twist; and then take the thread and tie it around all the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and start the syringe again as soon as the bladder is empty, and let the patient remain still.
des maladies de la vessie	for diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When bladder itch or scabies comes about, and the urine is mixed with urushiol, then you should distill water and medicine there, if done in all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is the form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are 2.iij. punctures: 2.i. on one side, and 1. on the other, as you see; and let his hair grow by which the medicine can be well stopped up without addition, if we may draw out the moisture, and squeeze when it is necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see to remove your medicines out of the bladder, put the chief doctor into the moisture, and draw while you are drawing, which is following; if you draw the moisture out of the doctor, and then squeeze it back hard, there will go in the moisture again, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient shall feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of a subtle clister which one makes for the bladder: if there is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or of oak, and this is the head above; and take a sheep bladder and i put the moisture which you see to clisterize the bladder, then tie it between the 2.iij. bladders with a good double thread, and heat the moist bladder on the fire; then squeeze the chief of the clister in the bladder, then draw your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make it into a circle, and pierce it roundly; then insert a strong thread in these perforations, then join the circle as one would join a door, and place inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing it against your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the types of stone and their extraction methods in general terms, and we have distinguished between stones in the kidneys from those in the bladder, and also between the various types of stone; and I will now briefly explain each type of stone and its treatment.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, which is a sign that water has separated from the urine in its fineness; and if it is not treated, it will grow smaller and then larger again; and its roots run deep; and it is lighter to treat children up until they are 20 years old, whereas older people suffer more and feel pain in the middle; and the treatment for those who are between these two ages is less effective. The cure for those with large stones is easier than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary to first clean up the patient with an enema, to drain out all the matter that is in the intestines. For he often tries to get to the stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the legs and move them up and down until the stone comes out at the bottom of the bladder, and never go higher; then make him sit with your hands under his thighs, so that the bladder hangs down; then examine and feel from the back.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in your space, hurry now to cut it off on top of the stone. And if it doesn't come out with the touch, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, for the patient is old and completed; and pour it into its foundation, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your second finger, see if it goes to the neck of the bladder; then press it with your second finger, and pour it out at the end where you can feel it being cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and command him that he extends at his right hand the testicles above, and at his left hand he presses the skin that is behind the testicles in the part where one cuts; then pour out the semen copiously, from which this form comes.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make a notch between those who are between the coions and the foundation, not in the middle but on the coast of the left side; and be right on the stone, and your two are together or at the foundation, and let the saw cut so that it is wide from behind and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	for fear that the press should go off without work; and know that there is part of the stone where there are angles and edges: so it is easy to extract; and if there is part that is rough, resembling a spike, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li 1.i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge li 1.i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, put the largest first at the collar of the bladder, then cope on top, then cut further, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any. And if it is very large, then you should make a small hole; for 15 things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out by itself because the leech cannot hold it; but nevertheless you must try to extract it in pieces with the tweezers, as long as you are able to.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, if the wound is hot, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood and bandage it, and put a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to calm the abscess; then tie the patient by the neck, and do not release the bandage until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if the oil and water are well raised, then treat the wound with saffron poultice and basil poultice until it is well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and frosts of blood in the bladder, and if this [urine] is not removed in a certain way so that it does not flow with urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will freeze the bladder, and burn it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and then raise the wound with water and herbs and salt, and help it in all ways that you can until it is well; and it is necessary that you bind the thighs for all the times that you cure it, and arrange the medicines on top.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is where he is conducted by the penis, and inserted therein, and the urine cannot come out; if the cure of what I said above, that you cut him many times, is excused by this cure. I have already tried it in this way.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take. i. piece of iron according to this form, and be made into ii. angles, i. with the edge turned in.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thin metal wire and put it into the edge of the stone, so that it does not come out again in the bladder; then push the wire lightly into the edge of the stone, and turn the wire slightly so as to cut the stone from all sides; if the urine comes out soon afterwards, then press your hand on the one who is delayed by the stone inside the penis. If it is broken soon afterwards, and jumps with the urine, and heals the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason, then take a thin wire and put it into the stone, and another above it; then pass the wire between the ii. threads, then pull it out sharply, and loosen one of the threads, and clear the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure as long as it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation," don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like  "Here is the translation," don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	Here is the translated text:
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well whether her wife is a virgin: then it comes to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if he la trueve, so he binds his finger, and recommends that she puts his finger or with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand over the bladder shape.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If he la trueve, so it comes that she moves from greit to greit from the entry of the bladder until he reaches desoz, as much as she comes to the root of the thigh; then cope up on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle dou con, where it is mues apparilliet, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his finger above the stone or desoz, and make the cut at the first little one;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then bottle the cut in the middle, if you feel the stone so much to the wound that the stone can come out, and know that there are many ways of stones: it is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have rains. If you know these appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the sin does not go away, put vitriole broiet in it, and keep it for an hour until the sin is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you with your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if he does not wait for it, and this is the artery that has been cut off, put the powder on the place and strain out the blood and fat, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, but only in case the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has subsided, and the veins have opened, if he returns to your work, until the stone is far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernial pain
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	of hernial pain
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the procreation of this ramose thing is so feeble that it comes to unions, and that material is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is no time when it comes to the unions due to percussion, and this moisture has many colors: or it declines to yellow, or it lacks red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and this is the sign of conoistre this assembled thing, for if it is as white as we have said, it is the reons of the apostemes, i.e. short and like the figure of an ox, and does not open the unions, because it has moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper toil, it is the reons of the apostemes with a part of the uief, and for this one thinks that it is another uief;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if moisture is between the skin of the coccyx and the white fat, then it smells good; so when you see to know the color of the moisture, try all the inner part because its form is as follows:
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the inner part, judge what is inside it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we heal him with fire, if it is appropriate that the patient be made well according to his strength and the fulfillment of his body; then let him lie on his back, on something a little high, and cover him with blankets.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit down on the left side, and instruct the minister to sit down on the right side, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs at the back of the coccyx;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	and take the spatula, and scrape the skin of the cow among its long until it reaches the hand's knuckle, and let your cut be all straight by separating the skin of the cow up to its white sinew, and the bark lightly according to Tom's advice.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the sinew of water 1 inch large and clean cut, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers, and pull the sinew up; and do not touch the skin of the cow but only the sinew; and carefully scrape it off by piece, so that if you do not scrape it well, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the glue should fall on your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished working on the sinew; and join the 21 pieces of the cow's skin with a seam, then treat it as you do the other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the glue is corrupted by some other disease, then you must lay the vials that are suspended there, in doubt of the corruption of blood; then take the cow's skin and scrape it off the vial, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then chop the other part as you did the first evenly, and wash the blood, and put into the wound another wet one with oil drops.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put elsewhere another wet lambs' wool with wine and oil, and put on the two branches, and put over them double sheets, and lay it up all along this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take 2 sheets of cloth, and fill them with wool according to this appearance and join them together by stitching around the neck of the shirt, and let one of the shoulders rest on the ground up to the back, and the other at the shoulder part; and the other two chief ones on the two arms, and is all joined together in the loop of the shirt;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and there is no times this medicine of the ramice of cautery in place of a size of iron, and it is that you press 1 cautery chisel delicate, and chop the leather of the branches, and is heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the water comes out;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you apply this fire cautery according to this form, and pierce that which is syphilic with it, and scorch it with this fine cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cover it in all ways that you can, until you have scorched everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the uvula; and know that this work is safer; and be careful of blood loss and of the wounds caused by cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you oppose it, or an abscess or blood loss or something else, if what opposes you is removed, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then you must cut it open, as I have said before, and when you are certain by the signs that we have spoken about that the ramie has come out, then:
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If he is sitting on the bed, then lift him up; then pierce the abscess in the part of the buttocks to all the wide skin, and place the hole of the long spine; and let the pores be large so that all the water runs out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton in the hole, and wrap it up, and leave so that the remaining water runs out, then heal the wound until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the bleached cloth leaves water to run out of the wound's mouth, then you must put a pen or instrument used to drain the water from the hydropic into it, so that its shape is as described above; and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered together after 25 days or so, and when it has been gathered together as before, and like that the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess of the crotch
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	It is known that with this ramie treatment there are many different conditions to which one must be attentive, so I think it would be best to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say, then, that many aphes come from the crotch, and most often; and this is due to various causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is known by bitter and sour excess, which expands towards the crotch or is spread by impact or percussion; or
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the chest; and do not piercing for pain, and the abscess is grief;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes an abscess is gray and piercing and of a pusy color, and never comes from a vein, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, if it is by the disposition of the abscess that you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not come except that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Cil qui est fais d'enflure de veine est connu par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can do well the size on this appearance, and on the other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and is that you cut the curls of the hair, then the hair is on top, and the trail is white clean, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the hair.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	For if the hair is already sored with these curls made, then it is necessary that you bring the hair, and the curl.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is air-dried, or in those who are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this held, and the cover reverberates.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is behind, then it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the placenta, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then employ the wound with wet wool soaked in oil and wine, and then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the appendix of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is the translation of the provided Old French text line by line into English:
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient grumbles when he goes;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this disease is well known to be fearful as described above;
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on .i. a makeshift bed, then the bottle of the suspender of the testicles is taken down to your two sides,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessel which are near to the penis, and make them wet, and spread them out flatly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut the scrotum with a sharp instrument in a slanting way in the area of the vessels, as long as they are uncovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	And I take an awl where it has .i. a double thread, and tie it to the first place where his vision came, and quickly to the other head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then wrap the wound tightly according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as you would any other with a bow, so that no part of the joint hurts;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there comes no harm, and all the servants come forward, so that they may be led away from all the joints;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that he does not lose his hair due to the cutting of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphic
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disease are: if it is due to section, that is, cutting, so that the syphic comes out, or extension along the abdomen in the region of the entrails, because the intestines descend from that section into one of the loins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this section is where the syphic comes out, or from the extension of it, and these .ij. ways arise from causes: from percussion, from jumping, from braying, from lifting a heavy burden, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from an extension of the medicine, if it happens little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even until almost to the end, so that the medicine hurries up the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the medicine, that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscesses appear different, especially around the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body away from the medicine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there is no time when the loop with the intestine comes out, and it is held back, and causes great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with fire for fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the ovraige is that you command the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound if it can be re-entered;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let him sigh upon his neck between your hands, and open the belly;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then take off the skin from above, and cut through all the skin of the loins;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then pour into the scabbard of the sword according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the blade can be drawn out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the skin of the cow so that the bone is exposed on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then dip your second finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, in that which is exposed between the skin and the bone, and between the second which is exposed;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then dip your first finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, and between the second which is exposed; and then dip your first finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, and between the second which is exposed; and then dip your third finger in what will serve to open the cow's belly, and between the fourth which is exposed; and then dip your left hand between the skin of the cow and its udder, and hold the white skin towards your right hand, and hold the udder to one side;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command to the minister that he extends the staff above, and from this who is higher behind the binding.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and examine your two sides if there is any wrapped or white intestinal stuff, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or there is a thick thread made of 3 lines, and pour it into the behind part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the scrotum; then cut the strings that appear from the threads, until there are 4 lines;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then put one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is tied to the skin of the scrotum with a strong thread of i lines;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	and wrap the heads of the silk, and join them with half-parts, so that no one of the lords who feed them can come in our eyes, for the eye does not come.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place therefor the line according to the first long half of that, and after those two lines leave a space which is twice the length of one line;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the eggs, so much so that it does not break, and the bow, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	and then put the wet wool in oil, and put on the plies, and then put the line that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is the white blood cauterized which we have said, after the incision, from fear of the decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it seizes itself; and if it delays in the seizure, let there be raised of warm water, and put on that which we have said, as long as it seizes itself;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other treatment until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from a hernia of the flesh
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to try to heal with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient one said that it is made in this way: as you tie together the pieces of a ram's leg, so you must join together the bones, after cutting them very lightly at the joint;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then chop it up, and cure the abscess of he who is affected by it, until the bones are free to move again; and treat it as we have said, until it is well.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No wound should be sutured except in the way we have said, and the incisions made; and if there is any exit of the bowels, it is little, and repair every hour; and if there be an exit of wind, let it out, for it is but a small exit; and li malade ne deve adoucir ni peller, mais li doiz avoir sa meure.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and whenever he lingers too long on this point, believes that there is a wound or pustule as far as the intestines go.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the pus which is in the cheeks, as we have said, for it is extended, then becomes softened and swollen, and its openings enlarged.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have previously said; and it is never cured with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cover the wound with a lint wet with the quantity of two drops:
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then remove the medicine which is on the skin that is swollen, and then take the poultice and place it over the visible part of the medicine.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then press down on the abdomen completely, and cut the .iij. visible parts of the medicine on top of the poultice head, and cut both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then remove the head of the poultice, and do not cover the medicine or extend any other thing, so that you know how to treat the entrails ramie.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then cure by curing wounds. And when you cut the hairs, if the wound is clean and healed, do so until it is completely healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The medicine is difficult, and has no appearance in the cut, and the cauterizations are soft in this place, and are closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the hardening of the skin of the anus
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Several times the skin of the anus is softened in some men, because the matter that is within them is softened, and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean it, to make a cut at the base where the hair grows, and then to pull out the hair that is on the natural skin; then join the 2 lips together with one stitch or 3 stitches tightly; then cover them up, and clean as for other wounds, until they are healed, and tie off the thread.
dou chastrement	with fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Saiches that chastement is prescribed in our law, and for this reason I wish that I did not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary to speak of it only in two ways: one is that the mare in hand should reply when she is asked and be cured by the method of chastisement; and the other, because we have often had to chastise some animals for our benefit, such as goats and sheep and hares and others. I say then that chastement is done according to two ways: either by attraction or by slitting open. In the one in which we do it by attraction, we make the mare sit in warm water until her genitals are soft and relaxed; then grasp them with your hand until they are quiet and you can no longer feel them. From castration by cutting: you must first dye the animal, and press the skin of the genitals into your left hand, then tie the suspender, and wrap it around each testicle one at a time as you have well scalded them; and leave no little piece of the suturing thread and subcutaneous fat which is on the scrotum; and this method of chastisement is milder than that which is done by attraction, because by attraction something may remain of the genitals, through which the animal desires luxury; then cure the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigene is a char placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and also women have done it very well like a hand, and this is the cure. It is necessary that you take off the excess of the tentigene from your hand or fingers, and wash it lightly; and do not go too much in detail, lest blood come out, then the other cure until he is well; and at another char that comes out at the mouth of the marris, and use it, and perhaps jump up, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the old "cow disease". If you take off the excess, as we have said about the tentigene, and cure it until it is well.
de erratique	of the errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation of the text:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text into English:
des apostemes de la marris	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses arise in the chest, as in the case of tuberculosis and pus-forming abscesses and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, it is necessary that in this treatise I speak about the hot abscess that arises in the chest, which is not a kind of abscess but a boil; and if you know the work of iron, then consider that the abscesses are hot at their beginning, full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, then you can see them. Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die while the pain is relieved; and then put the patient on a .i. chair, and place .ij. small chairs where he leans, and support his back and join his feet away from the leg; and let his knees be wide apart, and put his arms out of his knees, and tie them firmly with a good rope; then suck his breath towards his left side, and introduce the instrument that is used to open the mouth of the abscess, through which the form appears afterwards; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you insert the raker first to determine the depth of the abscess so that what enters the instrument does not enter more perfectly than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the abscess with cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top of it, and darken the instrument. And when the boil opens, and the hand is soft, then cover it with a sponge, and when the bowels are empty, then put in the wound wet tents made with oil rosin or green oil; and place the tent outside the wound at the perfect depth of the abscess, and put them on both sides of the wound clean wet with water or mallows are boiled; then cure it after .ij. days of ointment coming before it, until it is healed; and do not lift up the wound and the abscess by the use of water and honey, and then only by water or roots of licorice and aristolochia are boiled; then remind him of the ointment. And if the wound has closed in the chest, then be careful not to use iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the next sentence to translate:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out naturally up top, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her virtue is weak, then let her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold it; and let them cook its oil or fenugreek, and then pour the balm between her two little breasts whose shape this is.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And split the second, and wrap up his nail as much as the moisture that is in it runs; and squeeze the woman's belly until the baby drops, and if it doesn't drop, then you should clisterize the woman with fenugreek musk with oil of sisament; then make her squeeze and shake for an hour: then now the baby.And if his two hands come out, then you should pull them lightly back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a .i. seat, and let her support her feet up; then remove the seat from the ground, and wrap her, so that she doesn't stand up; and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then wrap his hands with the knife that is here before it is placed, and pull out the child, and pull them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby comes out on its feet, if it is to be lifted up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then stretch a piece and then little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	As it jumps just as it is stretched, if it is commanded to be stretched, and makes it vibrate from its condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps, let God see you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not become smaller and smaller as we have said, so that it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it becomes lighter quickly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not become smaller and smaller as we have said, so that take musk of the earth, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all up in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the woman's nature in it, and let it sit.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	And then put her on the fire of tepid water until it is cold over the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is wet, she makes a necklace of honey and puts it on her and leaves it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then put her on a seat, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and squeeze her belly lightly, for the baby is coming now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child between her knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the baby arrives in this way, if he puts his hands on it little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on its neck, and let its feet dangle down, and let it lie there.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then he puts his hands on his stomach little by little, and then he grasps his navel with his hands until it is completely pushed out.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and when the baby does not cry, if it raises its legs and its body, then it moves its feet, then it puts its hands back down.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and feed the child little by little; and instruct the woman to sweat while the baby suckles.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the birth of the child who comes from a large wound one hand at a time during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	I come to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, if the woman stands and walks;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	s’elle ne peut aller, si la fais gesir sur .i. lit, et le déboute les jambes forment ;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	and then bring the muscle to the surface that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, if you make her sit on  .i. chair, then study to bring the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and shape the child according to nature, and make her shake it, and command her to stretch as far as she can while the child is inside her.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the delivery of the child from her head, and had spread its hands, and his face turned towards the mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	Come the bailiff held his hand, then he turned it little by little and gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the nature of oil and vinegar as we have said, then tell her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the face sits on .I. seat, and tell it to stretch; and the face shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this method for all of the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this way to all of the second part, if it is dry enough so that there is no moisture;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he pinches himself on his face and on his neck, and the fire goes out, so that it is not held, and the pincher dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then place the child inside, as far as you have put it, and instruct the woman that she not stretch herself:
adonques si istra legierement.	And then if it is light.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the union of twins,
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Says that twins are often born, and rarely born one at a time; and that is not an unusual thing, and it did not happen suddenly.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live, if they were named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know you, that they are many, and are cured by the medicine that devises them, which is tied to the bad.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never come naturally as all of us do, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it grieves, and if the cure is as we have said, and let the doctor be subtle and make quickly and lightly that which he does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as well as you can for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Many times are formed in the mare (mare, i.e., mare). Or 1. Or 2. Or 3. Or 4. or 5. or 6. or more up to 15., and all are formed by a measure of sage glory,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and cover so that the bailif knows all of this, because by chance similar things happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so make according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a stillbirth or an abdominal condition, as I mentioned in the division, and it does not respond, and you are forced to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is appropriate for you to know if the woman is of sound health, and she does not fear death because of an accident;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is appropriate for the woman to be bent over her back, and her legs raised, and her feet turned towards the sky;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister the scabs of .ij. parts, where it lies in bed so that it is not treated for the decline of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with oil made from musk and althaea and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muskellaiges;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then pour into the woman slightly, then add .i. drops or so that she pours the wine which is suitable for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care if it is cold that it does not freeze on her head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If he inserts thorns into his eyes or into his throat or into his mouth or into the palate or shaves off his beard or cuts near his ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if he falls on his face, if he inserts or pricks and they are in motion;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he hold the thorn in his right hand and place the cup between his two left-hand fingers, and gently hold the thorn against any one of these places until it comes out;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the thorn:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then find another piece of wood, or if you need to, cut it so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then extend it evenly from one side to the other, so that it can be moved, and hold the tooth in place with it, like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	If one part stops moving, then grease some oil on its two sides and push it in that direction, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if one doesn't move at all, then put this piece of wood higher up or lower down, and do so until it moves completely;
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by constriction,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must wrap him in a blanket, until he stops moving;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then place the cloth at the joint of the foot or the wrist, and in the other hand, do likewise to the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the birth, or it has a sharp head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it is necessary for you to pour the spiny sputum between your two hands, and move the head back and forth, and draw out the sharp liquid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or take it with the instrument which is called an “almidah,” from which the form comes with the instruments or paste that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in this way I make it come out with a great natural movement;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then draw out the bones with nails,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder bone is forced out, so that it is split, as long as the moisture which is at the tip moves out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces so that you can move it.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or between the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is swollen on its sides, then the mild pull will move it, and the treatment of the mouth with mild treatments is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, then know that you should extract it with a towel wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other member is dislocated and the head stays put,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	then take the hand of the patient perfectly by the palm, and pull it out to the mouth of the arm.
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	and pour upon it .I. an ounce of wine, and make it fume;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth is tight from an abscess that has come up, so that it cannot be worked,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then provide wet and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and provide plasters, and cut in aqua molis et umida;
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it is stuck on his ribcage, and you can put it back in place, then apply what we said about the live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if we do not have the power, so that they are taken apart, and leave nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, apply what we said about the feet that come in the mare (sea);
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if they come from the sea, so that it is dried out and restrained, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had one child dead, then another on top of it, and another that would die.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the twenty-one apothecaries in the pot, increased so much that it burst open and began to emit a great stench.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I stayed for a long time, but I couldn't hold back the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong poultice, and in it put a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed, for this child's belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I wanted to heal the wound, and with great care, as long as the woman's condition did not improve;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and waited for a long time until she finally arrived, and there was a little bow at her place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter of the medicine only because that, when the master discovers a strange thing, he may know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	how to put back in place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here follows the form of pressing, where one sets the bones; and at the two turns to the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be slightly thinner than the mandible, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let his mouth be two fingers wide, and the rim of the tree should be a finger wide, and long a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the three lines be two joints of this same stuff, which are joined together in one and in the other, a palm and a half long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the mandible to open when the two corners turn.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of the teeth;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and there are .iij. shoulders of the shoulder, if you see, of a palm long, and .iij. wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see open the mare with all the instrument, if so sit the woman on 1 bed, the legs during and the legs open,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then bottle the .iij. shoulders attach together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument between his breasts;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to all the instrument, if you have done it like claws evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the mare, until the ball makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are all mounted, and multiplied for their appearances; and when you look at them, the operation is more quick and greater in quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument unless you have equipped it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second one is retained for birth, command the patient to hold her hair back, and then cause her to sneeze, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she sneezes because of it, that's good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If he does not, if he can, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the wound, as chamomile, fennel, anise, yarrow, camiline and centaurium.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, are boiled in water on the fire; then put a plug or lid into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the wound,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let the vapor come out of the wound; then make him cough, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he does not, if he can, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that may open the mouth of the wound, as chamomile, fennel, anise, yarrow, camiline and centaurium.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and does not heal, instruct the midwife to soak her left hand in oil of seed or in musk from the mountain, and then let it dry naturally.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and wants the second; and when she has found it, if she pinches it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marriage does not crack at extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but must move lightly from side to side, and then draw; but it will come loose and fall out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marriage is tight, we have said the treatment of swallowing, and of steam from herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all those we have said, so that you do not follow at all in the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you tie him to the cunt of the woman, then the cauterize with ointment tetrafarmacon;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	so that she who has put it in the mare, and then sets it on fire, and comes again; but nevertheless, when she puts it in, if it comes with a bad smell to the stomach and to the head, and bleeds the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So that the smoke of certain things is useful for this; none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument is such that when the woman is to be sterilized with smoke, this is how it should be used.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles a dog's head, and the thin end is placed in the nature, and the broad ends are on the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the smoke be over the coals, and the hair be completely burned, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but it is stopped with a subtle medicine.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So that the doctor who has the foundation pierced at his right hand may not pierce it with a needle and wound, and keep the wound from being infected.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a wet cloth of wine and oil, then the ointment cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that he will not recover, then put on a piece of leather and let his hands hang down, and be crushed when the child walks in bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no need for sudden swelling of a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover the sudden swelling: if you treat it as we said of the wine of plum.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodular and more painful than those that come from the fundament deflowered, or in the space between the iij parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, if it breaks open, and with a moist hot poultice or a subtle boil,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and never do these fistulas persist; and they are known by whom it is or excretion or wind when the patient has an excretion, and sometimes in a leap.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and if the fistulas perforate only to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and they come up to the joint of the scrotum, and up to the tip of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	and so you know if the fistula perforates down to the perineum, and not down to the anus.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and so you should stick your little finger or perineum, and stick a thin needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if he has tortuosity, if I but put a little string of horsehair, or .i. horse hair, as far as you feel the string or hair in your mouth;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no difficulty in passing wind or vomiting, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	be aware that it does not pierce; if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persisting up to the bladder or up to the urinary tract, if in jumping the urine, and cannot be treated by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just up to the hip joint, then he must be taken by the hand up to his full length.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If it does not have any twists and the pain is continuous, then it is already bad, and it has not yet been treated by medicine or sudden remedy by feeling;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but hard work, and the vain pursuits of foolish people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not persistent and not old, there is hope for health by fire, as I have experienced,
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he leans down his legs until his knees, and has his knees bent toward his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a tent of rain, or of mud if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	So that the patient feels the ground underneath, if it is convenient you put your two fingers there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then feel that the tent has been picked up; and if it is uncovered or you feel between your thumb and finger the syringe or the cane, then you know that it is effective;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if he does not work then he cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should use the fire cautery to heal some people well, but this is not often done; however, it can be.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that can be given, if one does this, is that the fire cautery should be heated according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said above;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the bottle should be heated in the fistula until it comes out clean; and do this 19 times or 23 times until you are sure that these charred feathers are burned, which look like an owl's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of the tent of water will saturate it, as long as that does not burn, and then the doctor of ointment will rub it while soaking and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is healthy, it is good. But if not, otherwise it cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if this is between the two and does not pierce up to the top which is at the base, and in front of the two there is a thick covering of wax or resin, and you see the fistula on that which lies under the covering of resin;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the wax of the encumbrance of the fistula, and pour on before the tent, and then apply the cauterization after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and will be delivered the test, and cherrie; then world-forsaken those cars faultrees that seem a quill of an oisel, and remain not one.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun does not go out, and wind between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicine astringent.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery gathers 2. things: that is to say, the burning of these dislocated joints, and the drawing out of blood and drying up of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of wet tents with milk or bread, until the liquid leaves, and seethes these dislocated joints in the liquid.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then heal the wound with herbs that dry out the hard core, and are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is reset, then is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the very foundation, and is separated from the body, it pulls at the root, and inquiries about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and enter. If it is the toe or the syphillus or char, where it is about to pierce, there is only one way of hope and faith, through the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	And do not cut it too deep, so that you do not hurt the foundation, and let the excretion come out voluntarily through one side.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	In case it is cured, or you remove the covering and clean up carefully the area where it has been cut, removing all traces of the wound, or using a sharp instrument.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	and then my Lord's good will come upon the wound, as well as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	and then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part further from the foundation: this is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And no fistula is made in this way; and it is when you patch the tent onto the fistula, and she is or costs from the foundation of leather above, that
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if a tent is torn at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put .ij. of a tort in it, and bottle the tent to all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistant in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that torn, so that you bottle your two or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and train the head of the thread and assemble the .ij. shoulders together, and extract one from another, and leave it .i. day or .ij.;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it not at all, until the thread holds these shoulders that are between two, and they grind;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too completely enclosed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make the lacing cover completely, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spikelet from which one makes the fistula if it is sharp and pointed, part and trenches;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, for this reason one doesn't chop what one shouldn't chop, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids;
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	are in two ways: either they are deep within the fundament, as grains of resin, and small and large ones arise therefrom, and cut short there; or,
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if one or more are there, and are far from the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are far away have little moisture, and
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and now again, where there is a little water of yellow color or a little blood, and they have the color of the flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those who have them in the foundation, so that you command the patient that he should sweat in bed, as long as the foundations are removed and the hair comes out.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and hold it like a claw, or if you hold it with your nail, then cut it by its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them because of their moisture, if they take them by the drapes, or by the cotton, or by a piece of cambric;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them with your two hands, then chop them up, and powder them on top of any hot powders that are in the place of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as said above with fire cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a sharp and biting cautery to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the patient is pregnant, and their cord is very tight at the fundus, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and are to be pressed with your fingernail or tweezers, and then are to be extracted, then are to be cured as we have said, until they are sound, and fear incisions made with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary to introduce the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then bring the thread over and under the needle several times, and pierce the needle through from the other side, and tie the two ends of the thread together tightly.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is thick; and stretch the thread out, then tie it, and remove the needle, and do the same for all of them, and leave behind one [thread] to control the blood.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation .i. cloth dampened with oil or resin, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest until it has recovered, and when it is healed, if the wound is treated with ointment and other treatment, until it is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do carefully at the end of its foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	For many times, the end of its foundation is dry in the intestines, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you want to remove it at the root of a scalpel or your nail on top, which does not leave it wet;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat so long as he is soft, as it suits him.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot harden, then begin to shave more forcefully than before, until the hair grows out, and is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat so long as he is sound
dou fremit	and then the fire will stop.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fire is a small appearance of skin before the body, and it grows completely.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	And no time does the wound hurt, and one can feel it like death throes, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a very strong vulture, and put that feather on the wound, until the purple circle covers the whole wound.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand over all the feather as much as you can cover the whole wound, and make it completely smooth, and wash the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then do this of a dog's skull or iron according to this form, and be careful not to cut into it and run over it.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not cut it, so that you keep the two together, and press them. And if you see, then cauterize the inflammation, as it is before or with the fire cautery of the chapter.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the blister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one should make blisters of silver or brass, or melted gold or lead; and no one should use these small or large instruments according to the purpose for which they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These children who are weak and suffering are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the clister is small and large above, or the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and there is a gap or the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the chest is pierced at one end, and open at the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly or the ommet puts the medicines in a bladder of best or parchment, and pierces all around the little hole,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and place between each hole i.e. must of space, then pour in these holes a strong thread of twisted cord in 10 or 12, and join the belly together as if it were a sheep;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies before a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And be the medicine not too hot or too cold, and oil or ointment of lamb's fat or some other thing, then pour it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then squeeze the ministers together with his two hands until it is completely full, then remove the cloth, and place the patient's legs against the wall,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he has medicine made, as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him with the disease of decay from the belly, and the medicine is hastening to come out, if he renews it as long as he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, so too is the cauterization as subtle as for a .i. child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the cauterization subtlety where the skin is held back:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the chapter on division; now we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and because of what causes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that cause wounds are from a stone, or an axe, or a knife, or a spear, or a club, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	ou that are done according to the rules of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or the breast, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because the remedy will come in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, if it is due to falling from a rock or similar things, and the skin is split but the flesh is not hurt, then you must first treat the wound with oil, and bandage it well.
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you gently cut the aposteme: if it is a little wound on the head that has come from the sanc of the wound itself, and not the opposite way around, then you must carefully
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and have the patient abstain from wine and fattening meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	If he does not eat, if his flesh is diminished, and does not drink wine or eat cheese, nor any other meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, if there is an abscess, cotton dipped in oil and applied directly, or in wine that constricts;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, if the wound is fresh and not moved by the air, powder which I will speak about a little later on;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it burns, put on some ointments, until he is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large as from a sword and similar things, and the lips cannot be put together by tension, so they are put together by縫ing, like I say in the wounds of the belly, from the縫ing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	For if the wound is exposed to the bone, and it is open, and only held by a little, so the patch; then heal the wound with medication, and return it to hard leather in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meats, like tests and wheat cake, as well as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a boil that doesn't touch the bone, cut it all out, and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein from which blood cannot be stopped by cutting it, then seek to find the artery, and if you find it dislocated, let it be as a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then a light treatment is appropriate: and that you put this powder that hardens so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood seven parts; live chalk three parts, and the powder finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and the bandage form, until it is well dried and joins to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it not loosened, if it swells; for one should not wrap up the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make a paste of chalk alone; when you have neither incense nor dragon's blood, but the armpit has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if it has burned, it will have moved the wound, most certainly it is so, unless I put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or balls of flour made from water and honey until it is dry;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments as long as he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if there is a fracture of the bones along with the wound, and it is small, then extract with careful pinches;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you here after about the breaking of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between that and a wound on the head, but if the artery is cut at the throat.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the neck, if there is no other device to keep the wound open and prevent it from closing, for it will heal itself and close up. But if you put something in the way, it will delay healing and increase pain.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the circulation of the blood goes with the brain, which is the highest limb.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be made up, as if it were hot water washed in with oil of rose, and dipped also in warm water;
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones according to this method, and wetting with moist oils.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that it bleeds and needs binding, then heal as long as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is full of bowels, so that it pierces or lower down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, so that she faints, and falls, and the fire cautery should be used in this case;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if the windpipe is cut, or the throat, and the voice is lost, and the sound of the voice is changed, because the meat goes;
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	So that the taste does not touch on the tongue of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he comes back forward, and leaves it for a few days, then he cures with garlic until he is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then let him want;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, and if you can't hold them all together, and those that you cannot hold, let it be as long as the wound festers;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be careful and strict with the dressing;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then heal it as I said in my chapter on the ointment.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	with a lance or a knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a cut from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound and see if the patient's breath smells bad: know that the wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not poured, and it is fresh to all of its blood, then I do not put the powder there at first hour, nor bind the blood so that it does not go on completely,
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and recover to the heart, and close up the wound;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put a healing ointment on it, and bind it 21 times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no ointment, then put wet cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound .iij. days, or .iiij., or more often;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor bad trembling of the body or strange movements;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Cure it with remedies and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, then operate so that there is a fistula; if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife blade and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then the cure of that which is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is great, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has made pieces, then examine the wound, and the deep wounds if they are unhealed;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not unhealed, then let the wound heal, and then perform the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds to other limbs, it is the same judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	and for the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	is great and mild and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	causing a great wound, sometimes the intestines break, or the intestines tear, because of the impact of the bowels;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitch is more difficult, and there is no time worse than the little wound that the big one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	for if you do not put the intestines back in place, step by step, if you do not put them back in place from warm to warm;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell up so much that they feel cold, if you do not put them back in place;
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for the little wound, for if you leave the intestine in its place more than others;
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The common two seams in the belly seam
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the seam of the other wounds of the body and .ii. other proper seams are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and all of them are more proper with the belly seam, and I will say each one and I will declare:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out.
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and a good thing is to put it back, this is done by one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when he is fevered, heat him with some such method:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moistening a sponge or .i. a napkin very well in warm water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you boil water with squinant and cumin and spice,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until it swells;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never done this with this vin, and is it not hot enough that you feel pain when you breathe.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestines with water or salt and cook them well,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this is the entrance closed to a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first cure is to make him sleep.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we do not cut him unless there is great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut into the core and leave it outside, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails are protruding,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is reset according to its natural form in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can do this, for it is a difficult thing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	If you make the sick person walk on their two feet,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and keep his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part of the body called the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if he keeps his head and penis higher than the parts that are sore,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and if there is a rupture from the belly, it is in one of the .ij. parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you are aware that the navel part is higher than the other part;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to treat what I say about large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, however, the equipment should be
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	Then put your hands .i. minister of mercy who seeth all the injury to his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	this is the common way of sewing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you squeeze a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	and leave from the top of the wound 1.2 inches, and stick a needle where it has 1.2 inches of good strong thread.
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the 1.2 inches of skin with the 1.2 inches of thread.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who is hidden inside the leather, as far as you make it go through from that side,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join the 1.2 inches of thread together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then the pulling out of a doubled thread goes through the needle from .ij. parts
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then put together the .ij. pieces of the wound in advance,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave 1 or 2 spaces, and then stick another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and never cease to do this according to what you need to do with needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	while all the wound is restricted;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and the needles are small, between thin and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the small needles fill all the space, and the too large ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this is convenient that they are moist.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and do not want to put the needles too far from the shoulder of the hide and the leather,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	for they do not want to cut and open the wound in front of the seam;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then close the head of the needle, so that it does not hurt the patient when sleeping;
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or tarps on the shoulder of the needle so that it stays in place.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it requires a needle or a pair of needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you join the .ij. shoulders of leather and the .ij. shoulders of syrup together with one strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these shoulders all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you wind the thread around the needle in the manner in which we weave threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and set aside space between each seam the thickness of a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is seven inches long,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up an wound or abdomen,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was torn by a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and this wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and there were also intestines of good length.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was on the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back the intestine; then it was eight hours old.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was healed just after .xv. days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the miracle was that they said he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in .i. days where there is no ointment or medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put on a lot of honey on the wound every day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.;
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	And I will tell you the seven proper ways of sewing.
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and dip it in the thread from the outside to the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When she has pierced the thread with the right thread from the right side, if you have dipped the needle in the dye or thread from the outside to the inside;
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and let her pierce it from the other side from the inside to the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the meaning of this passage is that you should sew it as well as the skin-worker sews fur,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the suturing of one side, and take up that of the other, until the sewing is all done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing, which Galiens describes properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is if if anyone does so, who assemble the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the heads to the other head, like this:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	file an awl or head of the needle nearest, and pierce that one only,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the .ij. heads of the shoulder;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the awl, and pierce it from the outside part only up to that one inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	As the head of the shoulder...
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	And then pierce each and every part of the outside until you reach the center in 12 other shoulder chisels that are on the opposite side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the method of sewing and it is the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen, then, thus speaks, and no one contradicts him,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	c’on doit coudre le ventre à .ij. aiguilles, ou il ait fils en chacune ;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew with knots;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is a stitch in the middle of the belly,
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the flesh has been moved.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you remove the intestine and the cut, then put powder on it, rubbing it in;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the flesh has been moved, then put any ointment that is present on it, as long as the wound boils;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the child, and let the milk flow, and the mirth.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with others, until it is well;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicine, put on it, soon that it begins to come out, cotton wool,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and stir it .ij. times a day until it is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of other medicines in many cases when wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is appropriate for you to soak another light part in hot oil or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it between the arms, and release the joints;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it causes pain or swelling in the belly, and often happens.
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the black wine enema soothes, and rarely does the inflammation come up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it perforates within, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	the intestine called "jeun" cannot heal if it is torn,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is because of the opening of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the approach to its nature of fire.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the arrow flies out of the wound, if he puts it back as well as the intestines, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it becomes yellow and brown, if you find the place that is black, that blood does not come from there;
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and take out who is between the thread,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two heads hanging from the side of the wound to the end so as to facilitate the extraction when the joints creak, and the wound is closed.
de la routure dou boueil	of the cut of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are runny, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	If so, can he be restored to health in some homes?
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I see that a noble man was pierced or wounded by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen.
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became a fistula and there was effusion and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I will treat you as well as I can, and will not stop applying the treatment until you are well, and will bind up your wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that the wound was healing, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no evil, but delayed in good health, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said that when one has a small wound in the intestines, one should bind it in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take some tongs from a large testicle, then spread the lips of the wound apart.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the tongs have opened the mouth, place it on the 1/2 lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it pulls its mouth apart;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then place the cup on the head, and so it stays in place so it cannot release,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and so on. I. another will moan after in this way that before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and measure the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	For if it burns in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestine thread that is moult dismembered,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the head of this thread .i. a fine linen thread twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the needle, and sew the intestine, and turn it back in the cut;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of suturing wounds is not strong except according to the road of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, most especially when it is in one of the internal grooves, then there is no healing without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from fistula or whatever
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	says that any wound or abscess, once it has healed, is called a "fistula" universally.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most certainly when she is riding and running around.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And the fistula is according to the green doctrine hard and white, where there is no pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also chewed like the feathers of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and at times clearly in the clear sky, and at other times thickly in the thick sky.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	not at all times, and another time enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed and there is no pain,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is only by one of the eight-and-thirty causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by smallness of age or of wound;
ou por sa malice;	For his malady.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For if he has a hard growth within him, and on the lips, so that it does not grow forth.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or if there is too much bowels.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or his loins are weakened, and the matter is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine does not help in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where for fear that the corruption is a sign of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where in the area there is late digestion, and late health, and by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or organs:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have most thoroughly discussed all these causes, and signs, and remedies of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	For there are fistulas which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu'il laisse les poilz tant qu'il soient lons et igals; et s'il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For the spine of the back, or for any joint in the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	And if there is a pain that comes from the primary member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are great sanitation, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula so that it does not come to light until I have said so, and you are engaged in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you can see it clearly, then take a tent of rain or iron, that the fistula is straight if you seek it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, then seek it with a subtle tent of water.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the plonk will bend within the tortuosity.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if it pricks his palm, you cannot well search for it with your fingers.
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if the blister is on one of the hands,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for if the moisture comes from one hole to another, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then search for it with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and chop it completely,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well of the pain that he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in some of the places that I have told you, if the wound is along the line of the joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and the bones are broken and the corroded chips that are within them;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until he is well.
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if his fistula is very deep from the right place, it is necessary that you cut it perfectly, as well as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then dip them in medicinal water, and pour them up to the base of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that is reserved at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put oil on the sick horse as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	if it is not cured by this, then let him be cauterized as we have said;
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then let him be mended;
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is injured in the main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	And if his nose is open, and there is corruption and blackness, let him wait until the whole bone is corrupted.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal him of things that cause trouble as long as he remains healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not healed, and his bowels are upset as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	So that you are not troubled any more than necessary:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you see it, and wait as long as you can.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and bone all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	if not, know that the corruption is too perfect, that you cannot come there;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other cure except to ease the pain by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with the right tool for this purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are several bones, and if you pull them out one by one, do not leave more than one exposed.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes him opposite, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it is cold and wet and hot, and delivers the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you do not remove them in an hour, put something that may cause pus on the wound,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it as long as the leaks are between the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then will have more easily the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, like a leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you only reset the fracture as much as possible so that the blackening is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then patch up the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great deal of putrefaction, and it comes up to the bone's root;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is suitable and covered all the way up to the corruption, and then heal it as long as it is connected;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may use this as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about .xxx. years old, who had a pain in his leg from some cause that came from within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as long as the matter came to the leg, and was gone away with a great abscess, and had no cause to put forth by opening it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the mirror, through madness, opened so much that it went up to the abscess;
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and corroded matter, and became a fistula, and I came out of a perforation that all went up and wet with moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many I have healed within three years, and there was no skill at all in the art of hands.
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	while I was called, and saw his leg and the medicine with which he was cured,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which runs through the pores with great force;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his body became red with youthfulness, and had an orange-colored complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I drove a tent stake into one of those gaps, and then searched all the gaps.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one came between the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I quickly went over there, and I drove a stake into one of the gaps until I hit some bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and broken, and the corruption went all the way down to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I liked that which appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption than that which I had;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicines which were made long ago, and could not be held together;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I began again, and uncovered the bone so as to see it well;
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I liked it, and then I held it, and I began to mend the joint;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not as long as I cupped an elbow of bone, and took it to all its limbs.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and fully recovered.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and he no longer needed to risk injury for the sake of the disease, which could not endure it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For due to the blood evacuation it often happened, but he was completely cured,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and bore in place of the bone a hard piece, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary from all to all, nor did it affect him to go or come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place of the skull, so that he becomes deaf in that way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take .i. a thread, and strain it to the head of the bone which is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command anyone that he extends upward;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and measure .i. another thread of a different thickness than the first thread and bind it over the bar that is behind the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the head, so that you pull out the broken bar,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the bar on top where you can see the silk, so that the silk does not stain the bar;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a piece of wood or a table under the leg so as to move the corroded bone;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary that one can see and feel the corruption, and sometimes also.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then discover the whole char; then put a piece of wood under it,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then let silk from one part to another the corruption, and let the silkworm out of long the corruption . i.e. time, if as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	if the corruption is in the joint, then break the joint and let silk the bone where it is contained from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	if the corruption is in the continuation of the 10 joints, then there is no other pain than that of breaking;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	if the corruption is where the hand or foot pricks, then this is a very strong thing;
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nonetheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it affects you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean thoroughly in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not make you contrary;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incision and threads to patch these bones are many, according to the position of the bone and appearance of the hair;
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their grossness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and because of this it is appropriate that he prepare each instrument for each kind of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the manner of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	and if you prepare the instrument that is appropriate for this, according to what is necessary.
dou feu	Here is a line-by-line translation of the provided text:
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	"When the head..."
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	"and when you have..."
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	"if it is necessary to cover that member all the way to the spot where the corrosion arrives,"
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	If the patient escapes from death by disease or by the evilness of the member, which is greater.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the members become black, so that they seem to be burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after that blackening, then goes this corruption of the member from one member to another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold all over the body; if you hurry with the cobre (a kind of metal),
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the piercing of certain poisonous beasts, such as the sea scorpion and snake and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	For if it is due to the corrosion at the top of the two bones, if you split it, and do not give it space to come out to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes only to the hand, if you split it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, if you split it at the collarbone; and if it passes the collarbone, it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and don't measure its effectiveness by how much of its goodness we use;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	And so the rust comes or begins at the first joint, and then moves to the other joints after it;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	If it comes or begins to move, and then copes all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	If it moves up the leg, and then copes at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes up over the hip, then there is no other remedy than to make the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way of copper or iron to the limb so that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend two ministers one of the threads upstream, and another minister the other thread downstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you remove the hook that is between the .iij. threads to .i. spatumile wide, as much as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	Then the cap or silk, and place each part .i. a linen draping, so that the silk does not touch the healthy spot,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient other injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood flows when you work, cauterize the spot immediately,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or put on some powdered substances that restrain it; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then cut off the member with a knife, and heal it as long as it is sound.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a man at 12 o'clock yesterday:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a blackness that seemed like fire to him,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corruption came first in his foot, so much so that it stained all his foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the hair is corroded, if it rusts on the stone, and is healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after came to me the corrosion or rust of the hand, and came to me;
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put on him things that rub against after purification of the flesh, and cannot stop the rusts;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he told me to chop off his hand, and I don't know how to say that I have hope of regrowing the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and doubt too that if he were to cut his hand, he would not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he struck off the cup from his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no more to say but that each one do as needs be.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No one time comes the abscess to the surface of the flesh, and it lasts so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it runs and breaks out, and in the bowels it remains hidden, also as our servants;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the leather that is above is also thin like.i. drapelets deliquescent,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and it does not hurt either to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is done by heating the skin very well, and most especially when it is thin, as in a piece of cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not burn for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you see that the skins are getting thicker, and the corruption has not yet fully gone away,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the leather is thick like a horse's hide, then let them take a bath with this:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look if the breasts are large, and the milk that comes from them has an unpleasant smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then apply the Egyptian medicine that is made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take ash, oil, and litargy, evenly, and put them to cook in a .i. vessel by the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cook the wine in a vat, and extract the perspiration;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and remove the medicine after 1 . ij . hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this mowting as many times as necessary until the breasts are completely empty and the milk comes out;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is it cauterized with ash of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze ash from a vine stem and add water to it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and drain it, and bandage it, as long as you know that the breasts are well drained;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor ashes be used for him;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if the cautery is with water and honey or a little bit of lead oxide;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you cauterize it with honey and wine that honey has the property to cleanse and wash,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the health bad;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have bet that the breasts are very well changed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the cauterization of that which makes breathe causes pain in her,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and is that you squeeze ochre definitely, and the paint with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. If there is a small hole in the sinus, then the cauterizing liquid cannot enter.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If there is an opening of a small piece of iron, and put it under a tent of Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	For the ointment is basic, so that it may be widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so the cost and I let too much fluid .i. water or urine to enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the pit that shoots out blood is above, if the wound or lower than it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the wound is well-healed, so it does not leave a scar;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast well, as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If he appears in such a way that the bow falls to the lowest point that it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is completely drawn, if he does not leave a gap behind.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the lower end of it properly as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If he appears in such a way that the bow falls lightly to the lowest point that it is, and does not leave anything behind of the bow:
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medications to solidify it, put on top of the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and be wrapped in a linen cloth that covers all of the breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then tie it tightly around the chest with a strap that is larger at the first point,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then apply ointment to the other cloth according to the quantity of the bulge,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it over the shoulder blade to straighten the bow, and do not take off the large cloth except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and who is on the shoulder blade, often takes off to take off the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what corre of the bow, if it is poison or a little or enough, or digestible or indigestible;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when this medicine is extended in one part and you see the nature that jumps on the pit of the chest,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts have already begun to move, and bring the saint;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then let it rest in the morning, or in the third day, and when you remove the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if a new cloth is changed, and the ointment is renewed.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become swollen and uncomfortably large after many days, knowing that the breasts do not grow larger.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle venom creeps slowly along for a long time, so that you do not despair of your health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health draws near. For there are men whose nature it is to heal wounds, and others whose nature it is to cause them;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if her breasts become swollen and uncomfortably large after many days, knowing that the breasts do not grow larger.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if it is late to come forth, and is prolonged, so that it becomes stiffened, then take medicines, wet in substance and dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	if it is finished with cauterization, for there is much lead in it, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the last cauterization, and do so with rose oil, and dip it in equal parts of wine;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	and then apply it; and this same thing, made into a paste, is better cooked with honey;
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When the heat treatment is finished,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	Take mirr and oleum and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle on honey when it has come out of the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in a bowl, and place it on the chest, and never administer it without arnica or something else,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of licorice, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and when using simple substances or compounds: grind them, and make a powder of them, and put honey which I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then you will know that corruption is complete, and it makes an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure for the cure of fistula, as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toe of the foot
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is a blister that comes from an injury to the thumb of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or at the foot, or perhaps it arises in another two;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is worn, and one does not pay attention, then it comes to be a blister, a small blister,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and get bow so that it runs root of the nail, and perhaps all run it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion until the bone, so that it comes stinking pain, and is the head of the two wide, and is the color runs.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	so that you cut off all the excess that is held up by the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail is pushing forward, and it pricks, and it blisters,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	so that you put the right treatment on the nail that pricks the skin,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the bottle on top, and cover it carefully and lightly,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remains of the char burning and corrosive medicine to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure with onions as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then chop and burn, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the two corrupted, if the coat is a .i. of us as it is said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal him as long as he is sound;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded, and bruised, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal him;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail of the spurious toe in a slanting direction from above,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and guard so that the cut does not come to the nail who is dislodged from the toe, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is something placed on top of it that provides relief.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the arm pit of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The following is a partial translation of the provided text:
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance he has broken his arm, and never has a finger broken.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	And no two are born from the root of the joint, or their birth is in some of us of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Who is born from neither of the two roots will not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and who is born at the root of the two will sometimes move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the length of him who is chubby so is light, on one way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	take the size of him at his root with a wide spatulate.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint so is difficult to cure: if you hold him down with a cloth.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In he who is born or should be cut near the root, so that you first cope the flesh completely up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then tie the bone to a suitable silk, then heal it until it is well.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, by the burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you tie the joint so that it aligns according to its natural form;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tendons or drapes wetted with oil and rosin so that it does not stick;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	put between two pieces of fine lead, so that the legs are welded together.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	if it comes together at one end with the palm, if it welds together as well.
Des vils	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more is taken away from the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must not administer any kind of purging at all, and then treat the disease from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure for iron is done according to three ways: one is by copping and drawing out the black blood; another is by
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is if you feel the vein, and then treat it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size is determined according to this method: raise the first leg of fresh water, hot, until the thick skin is slightly stretched.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then stretch the leg of the sick person from the hip all the way down to the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut a vein in .i., .ii., or .iii. place of a broad width,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then draw and twist the vein with your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient can bear to let flow.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then let it lie, and he commands that he be dyed with black dye;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin again the evacuation and the bloodletting when the veins are clean, and hurt the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The alleviation of the pain of the patient is done according to this method: raise the leg of the patient, if there is hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	and then put it in a bath, and dip it in hot water until it turns red, and swollen the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, warm it by the fire, and then hold the long side at the hip joint, or in the lower part of the thigh to the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin with oil, and scrape the vein from each side until it is felt when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it appears red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems as white as a cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pour the oil from the hair, until it is lifted from the skin, and then rub it with oil lightly;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then make a cup in the other place too; then peel the skin off over the vein as long as it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then cut it at the root, as you have done, and peel it off at another angle, as you have done first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then make a cup of a different size, or several if you need them, then peel it off and cut it at the base on the other side;
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then trawl and peel it up to the second size; then remove it by size until it is all gone, then cut it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull and lift it up, so I bind with a needle of all .i. strong thread doubled.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and lay and draw it up, and I bind with a suture, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not tear, for if it tears, so you cannot pull and lift it up, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished treating it, so put wool wet with wine and oil on the wound's top; and treat it until it is well.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if its vision is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	if you split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that covers the eye if it is curved, and does not split it, but covers the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and here is the form:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and land that does not have moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	And perhaps it will grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this will cause a rash to appear on the skin that leads to dry rot.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	If it grows inside the body, twisting and coiling, it invades the skin and the hair.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this condition are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the parts change, and begins to come out of place, like a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is opened, if you wrap it in a piece of cloth from one and a half to two and a quarter inches wide, and then cover it with a towel,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leaves the cloth hanging down from the leg, and every time that there is a movement, if the wrap goes around the cloth, and then cover it with a towel;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too far away, take a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cover it in its root as long as it is all out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you take it, if it enters into the horse, and causes abscess and putrefaction where it is, and produces evil disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the head, and there remains nothing of her or her curse;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and this chapter is never treated when it comes to long palms or fingers;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one honourable man came to me, who had .x. palm-lengths of hair; and when you cut him, if it is a little raised or sunken, and pierces right down to the foundation,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that all is destroyed; and so that the material within it is emptied, and put in place medicine against pus every day, then heal it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never at this vein's base, and least of all when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out of a little opening, and where it jumps out, then heal it as we have said above.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the worms that are born between skin and hide
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "beef disease" because it often afflicts cattle,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and is a small worm that is born between skin and hide, and goes everywhere up and down the body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it smells good to the member's alarm as it goes from one member to another, until it turns the hide where it went, and jumps.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is infected with certain humours, as they come towards and wind around, and shine, and worm-like creatures or eggs in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	And doubt of his evil, for when he goes through the body, and he rises to the head, and comes out at the mouth,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	then enters and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and treated, so can one only go:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	If it is then necessary that you keep the place dry by a strong knot well tightly tied,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	and cut it straight up and down, and turn it upside down completely in the mold, and you do not cut it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if the fire cautery on it, as long as it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see his head coming near the oil, hold away from him the form of the wound, then chop it off and cut it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is appropriate to use the patient of purification of skin with soluble medicines for the bad humors that are produced,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if he is cured of meat that causes putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	For pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vacir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it spreads from one limb to another; and I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered some of her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and then I saw it rise like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	as soon as possible, like a sharp silver blade when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain leaves the shoulder joint and enters the shoulder blade,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	and then he told me that she twisted her body, as I saw it;
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how she moved her member from one to another, for I have never wanted this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had heard that many people who suffer from this disease want to move their pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I have never wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that perhaps because women have narrow waists and open veins;
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this it seems that the wind has been forced out by constriction;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicious, and have moist hearts and relapsed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the head remains fixed and motionless, and then copes with it so that the wind constricted at its base may come out;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the joint; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the healer of those who cause windiness, like filthy pills, and horse-astrakhan pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the type of feather used for them.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those that have .ij. angles, and those that have tongues, and those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the one that doesn't shake in any member according to .ij. ways: or if in a principal member it shakes,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members;
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls to the ground then you shall know that she is dead, I will tell you what below.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is convenient for you to extract this arrow, for death comes after many preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when the bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, if you turn it, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrow bites into the bone and jumps onto the skin on top of the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when amputation, sweating, and twitching in the limbs, inflammation and swelling of the tongue, spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of phlegm;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance there is no air through the nostrils or ears; and by chance they lose their speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and by chance there is a white poultice-like sap coming from the wound that looks like burned flesh; and by chance it also looks like burnt meat;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign reveals itself, if you keep the cure, and treat the arrow if it is still inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it is shot or struck, is that it is near to the left breast, and also as if it were lodged in some hard thing, not in a void place.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the arrow moves like a bird, and in dark short breath, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and faints.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you will have no doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that is shot out of its sheath is that there is no foam in the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he/she gasps and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters the shell of the shoulder, then it tears the small ribs; and it gives great pain and a great sighing; and all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters the stomach, perhaps some meat will be wasted from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters the belly, and through the intestine it does not come out, there is no hope for recovery, neither for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, and with it the urine jumps out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and leg and foot, and similar limbs, are safe according to many provisions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the neck or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you that it has happened to me, do not make any other way.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There came to one man an arrow where it entered in the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and pulled it from the other side through the grease of the ear, and was cured without feeling any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And tie an arrow so it hits deep in the fat of the oil, taking off the paper.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was removed, and I could only see its tip toward the furrow.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was large of an arch-blue, all .i. heavy without ears; the game was clean, and there came no bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And tie an arrow to the neck of a Christian, and the arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loved the beard, and I made it grow longer than before, and the Christians were healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And tried an arrow on a man, that it struck his leg or belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after three days, if not his condition changed;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut the arrow, engaged it, and shot it, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to go to a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is sewed up;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and do not change its natural position within, and
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	do not find fault in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, to whom an arrow has been shot into his face, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and it endures much pain to suffer; and more like these.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And take an arrow from the king of the knights, that he was missing his eye, no need for an arrow shot.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was a little nghiêng to the right side; and the arrow was all re-set
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat after he was shot; I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I tried all of my efforts on her, and I did not feel it.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain and trouble in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought that it was from the point of an arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the leech- Infused with salt and digestive, for fear that the leeches would not stick;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I showed him how to extract the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put the plaster on every day, and resolved the wound very quickly, and delayed it for a long time so that the patient would not be in pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	for as long as he felt the arrow; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a corrosive aqueous medicine every day, until it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and try it, and feel the head of the arrow which has returned to its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied the medicine to the opening of the wound until I clearly saw the head of the arrow;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and I crossed well the boundaries of three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I spread out the wound with my hands, and pressed from one side to the other, and could not remove it;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I ceased not to study and devise methods of instruments, until I had taken it i.e., a day
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to that which its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I have held it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirage judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I held it and then sewed the wound shut, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or t’ai said the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you place your treatment on those whom I do not mention, for the book cannot take them all into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the master sage chooses only a few small things, and for those who are present and failing;
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	truly nine operations, and nine instruments, in the dismemberment of strange things that come into this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows should not come from the limbs except according to these 17 ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps out of its normal place, is an arrow entering into its flesh, and does not jump out at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let her leave the car while it is rotted in, and let its issue be heard.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and so it is stuck in the bone, and cannot stand up, if it leaves it like this for some days, and moves every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and so it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, then it pierces all the way through, as long as the hole inside is enlarged, and then the injury is done.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull, and goes into one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: if I don't pull it out, but leave it alone for a few days, so that it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if an arrow comes to the body just a little, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if an arrow is not stuck into the bone only, and comes just a little,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and if the patient remains for some days without any bad accident, then the machine of traction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is very stuck inside and cannot come out, then give it a massage, as I told you; then treat the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the heart, if one cannot see it, then search for it with all your might.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you can feel it, then handle it with an appropriate instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot, due to the depth of the wound or the thickness of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then cut through the wound as much as necessary.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and test the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone is stuck in by .iij. parts where you can feel it,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but rather tug at it more roughly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it once, then let the hair grow until it is long enough; then try to pull it out, for extraction will be easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain that comes with the extraction makes you oppose yourself, then administer what we have said about the treatment in our chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be careful of the nerve and vein incisions, and do not try to pull out the arrow without risk;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or hot or cold, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he had when the arrow entered his body,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid there is; and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, where it does not open anything of him, or the skin is swollen in a certain place if one sees it or feels it apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut off now as high as the hooks can take hold, and then extract it: but if it is too far gone, let it be left.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand in a circle until it enters the bone and widens the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, let her lie there still, and then begin the extraction again as soon as she can.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is stuck in the arrow, hit it with all your might;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it is a nail, and you see fit to use a hammer, so that if he uses a tool,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then hit hard,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is lodged, then he bottles it up.i. instrument with a sharp tip entering within, for to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	and if the arrow is touched, then you must cut through all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then clean the wound as well as possible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow enters anywhere in the body, and it is near, and you can cover it, then you must cover it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard against cauterizing the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch up the wound, this is a trade.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and heal as long as she is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the growing hair is like the feathers of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for cutting to the tip of the nail, so that it has this form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the claw for cutting and for keeping clean
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common heart vessels:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins which are cured are .xxxii, for which there is head xvi,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is what it means:
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the .ii. arteries which are in the .ii. temples apparent;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the  .ii. veins which are in the  .ii. limbers of the  .ii. hairs, which are called "aspirates";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the neck;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the seventeen veins that are in the collar;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on either side of the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are at the base of the tongue;
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly felt are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cerebral vein, and it lies on the left side of the neck, and laymen call it the "vein of the head."
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and its movement is called the  "fast", and is composed of the cerebral and basilic.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and laymen call it the "vein of the hand."; and the basilic, if it lies on the right side of the neck, is
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it gentle "vein of the belly", and is above the ribcage,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and this one that is opened clearly on the chest.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little finger vein is the one between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has three rays;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the foot is: one is so far from the elbow of the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second syndrome, which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein that is called "nasse", which is in the ankle of the other leg;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are .iiij. veins from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	And the vein that is after the ears if it helps the old catarrh, and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the vein, as I will tell you, and is that you return the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub his neck where the veins are with an coarse cloth; then tie up the patient by his collar with a rope,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the 21 veins appear behind the ears in 21 places depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then bring your index finger to his ear and feel for the pulse on the side of the neck, if it feels soft;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance, and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then gently pull your hand back along the vein;
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and chop and skin and the vein well .iij. must pass through, and make out blood as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then extract and heal it, as long as it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is old-fashioned emigrate,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and sudores, and oculis acostumatees, and to the chest of tears as eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	the qualities of the patient are thus: as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient should open his throat so that the two veins appear clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and place your two fingers on either side of his neck, and then sign with your hand;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then lie down and cut above your second finger, and open the blade.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and then cut above the vein, and the cuff, as you did in .i. other veins, and make a cut of blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then lie down, and put your second finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then let it rest until it is well; and we have spoken of its cuffing and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The pain of a headache is equal to that of a facial illness, and migraine, and jaundice.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until it feels better.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called a 'chisel', whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your thumb or another finger, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you wish;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then relieve the patient's neck, and bind the vein as long as it is healthy, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not convenient that the flame be too hot; and the vein being on the edge of health, for the bone is near, and the flame may break when it is thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The five veins that are in the five limbs should be tied with care to the hairs, and to the toothache, and to the rash, and to the earache, and to the eye diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient's neck is dislocated by twisting it with no ligature, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the fire, and so the surgeon, a little of the long flame a little wide, for there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance so it breaks; then make a wound of the blood, as you need, and then put on cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The surgeon of the vein of the baby so it goes into the body, and at once cut off, and at some distance from it, and from disease of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as headache and redness that comes to the face, and even if she is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of health is such that the patient twists his neck, then hold his nose with your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the thin flame long, and put it between the 10th and 11th nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well enough on its own, and the blood will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not overheat it too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then let it rest for a night, for it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	and the remedy for these three diseases is with the use of heat, and with pressure from a mallet, and many illnesses, and with vermiculin, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and scrofula;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the remedy is that the patient should remove his hair from the nape and sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts with a scythe on one side;
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein well long little widely, then treat the pain temperately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another in the other vein, then massage the leg, and extract the veins gently,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	to prevent the patient from choking; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The patient must not eat or drink anything until the wound in the lips has healed; and he must be careful to prevent any damage to the gums, cracks in the lips, and the birth of teeth, and swelling inside.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of this treatment is that the patient should sit in front of you, and his neck should be held in place as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip over, and look at the two openings, one on the right and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and recognize them by what color they are, and by what color they surround the small openings.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So then they both come together, and if you do not know them and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So then take the biggest of the two parts, and do the same for the five veins that are above and below, because this is a similar method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the side of the neck
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	From the side of the neck:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the medicine is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and the liver turns black, and looks down at each side with a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Heal therefore both of them, and do not become too perfect in doing so, for the arteries are within.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the back that are commonly healed are healed according to .ij. manners:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where one pierces with fire a wide flame, and with a sharp knife the olive-leaf, and is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the largeness and the narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is thin when it is named moist, and is wide when you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is a task to open the flat veins that appear with thick blood, which contain thick blood and trouble;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the shape of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle than pointed, and is for saving subtle veins, where there is subtle citron-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cure for the bazillar vein, which is one of these veins, is good for diseases that affect the throat, neck, chest, and stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the healer should cauterize and bind the artery that is beyond it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he stops the artery, and the blood flow stops, then he should bind it tightly, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be held by fire but be cut off like a horse's mane.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	If the nose does not open clearly, then you must extract it and change it with another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or if you do not see any blood, or if you feel the vein pulse in the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and hold it to the fire as we have described.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you know where the vein is, it is also necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the spot until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the spot for the incision, then tie the arm, and cut the vein from the flame in secret;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the spot bleeding, for it is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see urine rising high as a child's urine, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten yourself, then, and set your shoulder to a long time, and then loosen your shoulder without straining, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the arm rest and leave it alone, and do not move the patient; and be careful, and do not move it until it is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it is not dislocated, and you will come to me, and the medicine is not given to you, then open the artery, for the head of the shoulder is dislocated; and hold it steady.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig tree, and make it, and take one of the halves and set it well up until the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If it does not bleed, it is good; if not, if the healer, as we said, of the powders that stop bleeding;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of the blood is not due to multiple conditions for the small size of the wound and the possibility of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The blood of the vein in the middle is treated with fire so that it stops flowing from the top of the head and the neck.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	For this reason it is composed of the basilical and cephalic veins, as we said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is fitting for the physician that he be careful of the nerve which has been stretched, and if he cuts too deeply and completely, the nerve will be torn.
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the patient swells and his health is damaged, and perhaps cannot heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any way because of its lightness, then you must heal the instrument carefully; avoid damaging the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then divide it longwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The cure for the headache of the shoulders, so it hurts the neck, and helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And it is necessary to heal with fire from the olive tree or from the mirrin tree, for this is the most salutary of all veins, for it does not affect the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, one should always start with the lighter treatment first, and do no harm the first time, and then start again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And in case one hurts some men the first time, it is no harm done, but it is no harm if one starts again;
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about a healer, is that healing should only be undertaken to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent future illnesses from developing.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	The healer should be skilled in one of the three main areas of healthcare at the time: head, face, or gut.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and it is necessary to take care in the beginning of pregnancy, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and it is necessary to take care the first day or third day, after 1.2 hours or 1.3 days every day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The remedy that is administered to the sick person does not have a fixed time, but rather it should be taken at specific times and intervals;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to take care of children before the age of 12, and women only after four months until seven years;
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	They are not to take the old men who have lived for sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone is saved, in any way, it is necessary that he dislodge the intestines of a light enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has retained mucous from the end of the nose, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous mucus that is harmful to the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	do not save those who are too sore from meat, or who are greedy, as long as it is possible, or droopy;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and he will be affected by the pain after colic, and vomiting, and stomach upset, and frequent sexual intercourse with women, and childbirth, and staying up late, and anything that depletes his vital force, or by something from his weapon or heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then carefully the humors, he becomes thin first, through meat and beverages and medicine if you have used it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter or bathe, if nothing harms him, carefully to reduce his fever;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal the vein with a third part of the blood, as we have said before;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard him from work and from fasting and from lust and from similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be quiet and still, and let the doctor who is higher up than you heal you, and rub your arms. 10 times or 12 times,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then pull the ligament slowly, for when it is too tight or short, it cannot be cured;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub it with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then wet the skin with a little old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein at the place where he wants to cut,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not run and it is not hurt by iron.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee like strings when cut, and some that are easily winded,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts on the fire, if one removes it, the vein cannot be opened, and thus is one of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens a vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in these things it is necessary that the doctor be warned.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if he opens the vein for the first time, that is good; but if not, then let him begin again a little bit lower or on the back, where the legs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if his legs are swollen and the patient is hopeful, let him rest for a day or two, and do not tie his arms.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	for in case he comes to an abscess; do not go into the bath, and then begin again the cure if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the rib is broken, or the lung is pierced slightly with care and doubt that it does not hurt as much as you see, then be confident in this broken rib for all the fire correctly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work a little healing, so that the veins are swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not put salt on it, and put a little oil on it, for it cools the body's heat, and is soft in this vein due to the oil that it has;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each wound that you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this middle makes the triangle and bow of ears, when one lays it on its place; so subtle is the sinew and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes an abscess that is big, which happens many times, most of all when it is not inflamed except at that time or when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hurry, and put on top wet sponge in water and in silk a little warm, and holds it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days no black or green color, then it will not hurt;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on none of aloe or myrrh poultice in juice of mint, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance of the disease in the bazoo: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch when pressed with your hand, then this is the appearance of the evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So don't put on any of what we have said, because perhaps in the court without the artery; but make him a dry plaster to harden the place, then heal it with other remedies, until he is well.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each pain according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if it is without heat, let it be until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it be until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it concerns the one who is flat and dry, and has a need for blood extraction, that he make a wide wound, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and you must heal it often, and you must heal it by cutting across, not by piercing;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of healing is saved from the corruption of blood and the stretching of nerves, and it is better than long-term healing;
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose pulse is in sickness, it is appropriate to give moist bread in grape juice; if it is heated up, then it should be eaten three or four times a day.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold complex, if he drinks before the sickness moist bread in syrup of musc or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, if as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it has sweated at the sickness's exit, after drinking water from blood, it is appropriate that he sniffs brot of beer and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use of the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up his arms and sometimes other things, when it is necessary, as he weakens with great sickness, so that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits up his arms after the first healing, and he has a strong corse, so that he heals .vij. hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who should be healed from another part, should be healed two days in a row.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has internal heat that warms the body, and brings fever; if so much is drawn out, and the opening widened to the extent of a pea, then:
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	and then that you treat all types of disease, and place your hand on his pulse when he heals, so that death does not come in the place of a priest.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and if it happens again, when the healing has been neglected;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not come until you see the shoulder separate again, and close it, that you press firmly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, extend his arm carefully, for this would be wrong;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be so that it heals the second time; or you i point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which is frozen in the vein comes out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on .i. piece of string soaked in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, let it be so that he does not compress it, as long as the abscess is calm.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, draw the blood a second time, so that it heals in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is cut at its base because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of the cut is so that the patient dips his hand in warm water until the feverishness is gone.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then he should move his hand gently so that the vein appears clearly, then cut it now, not wide nor long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And make the incisions wide and cut well next to the joint of the hand, and don't be able to pull it out, then dip the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is not yet healed, then do not re-break my hand in warm water, for we treat it more in the cold than in the heat;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the wound of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	the salve for the right hand's wounds is worth all liver diseases, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	remove the hand, and dip it in warm water, until the vein is hidden, if we see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the spine is bent, and you chop it from top to bottom, it does not hurt anything.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not cut too much at once, for the nerves are all exposed.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then dip the hand in warm water, so it freezes into the wound and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, put oil and sutures on the vein to hold it firmly in place, and do the same for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The medicine man must treat the disease of the mouse with his left hand, and do all that I have told you to do with the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The medicine man must treat all diseases that are located in the chest.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	To treat diseases of the heart and hold back flowering, to cure diseases of the legs and knees, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his medicine is that the disease drinks small amounts of hot water, and rubs the vein until it dies.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and put it above the ankle joint; and if the vein is at the foot, then go over the foot with more rain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And make it as wide or longer as necessary, or at the ankle, so that it does not hurt.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, do not worry about the nerves that may be affected, and heal it as you would a wound, and let the fire go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get out of it, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it is necessary to cauterize for the first time, then begin again on top of that a little bit, because the leech is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerve, if it is as we have said, and in this way do the same with the other stone evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leech of the vein is to be put on the heel, and its sourness is worth the pain of the knee, when it is for bloodletting.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its sourness is that the patient goes in or out of the bath, and strips off from the heel.iii. three things in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that the blood flows in all ways that you can, and crossing over.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and wait until you cut it, for its line is out, and it is much renewed by many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not cut it, so that the rain of the line opens or closes from the foot, and towards the small day, and guard against the danger.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make so much blood flow that you see it, and then wash the line, and put it on cotton and hold it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Vacuums of suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made from horns, or of air, or of glass; and the suction is done in 13 ways: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or not piercing but drawing out by a kind of force.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this suction that is not done by piercing is done in 13 ways: either it is with a sharp instrument or without a sharp instrument.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and suction that is made by piercing and drawing out blood is done in the following ways:
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	for the head is one piece with the neck; and the others are joined to the collar.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and there are two in the collar, and one at the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and one at the shoulders, and one on the back of the neck, and one between the eyes.
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the ones that cover the arms, and the ones that cover the legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction of the .ij. feet; and the suction does not treat blood, save that of small veins that are scattered in the carriage
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and so you do not affright any, unless it is a small vein that is spread out in the carriage;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be mixed with anything, nor burned nor chilled, in any disease that comes from overindulgence, until the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity it is needed to suction, or through custom, let us make it uniform every hour in the beginning of the month, and at the end, and every ten days;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are many who, when they have the need to ventilate, become very heavy-headed.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if it is true that people who are venting and have a flush on their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who are venting a drop of blood in their mouth, and have escaped the tongue, and feel thirst for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who dream, and see vision, and death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and most especially when it is damp in the month of May, we order them to be breathed on after iij hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The treatment of the disease of the head with the help of the herb called marjoram ... which comes out, and does not come until all the body has been evacuated;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this breathing should be in the place of the treatment of the head;
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not come until those who are of a cold complexion and have a headache, because this makes them much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason I am not sure it is right to use it while sleeping or those who have a cold or feverish illness.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are healing from it often become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The suction at the neck is in place for healing from the throat and base of the nose, and for this reason it is also used for cutting into the stone.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to cut through the channel of the pancreas, and all around, and to refill.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to push back, for if it holds too firmly, there is danger of injury or stomach or bowels.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventresses are the winds that come from the colo with pain in the head, and blindness and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of the saint's basil; and it is necessary that you instruct the saint to express his hand for a cut, so that he does not chop the artery, and do not cause an escape of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventresses bring about the death of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the saints' lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are a disease that comes from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The windings of the arms also cause as much pain as three veins in the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And commands the patient not to cut too deeply, for the bones are bare and the arteries can be easily cut.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse that is on the back so it reaches the foundation of the disease, and the disease of sore breasts, it is necessary that the ventouse be large and of air, for her work is to milk well; and if by chance it was thin, it would break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg ventouses open widely, for they draw blood from all the body, and they are good for old pains of the joints, and of the foot, and of the bladder, and they remove the flowers; and they are in the place of the iij. sophens, and of the iij. ankles, but they weaken the body after a long time, and bring death in many situations.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put the ventouse is that you put it first, and suck quickly, and put it firmly, and stir evenly, and do not cease to do so, until you see the red and inflamed place, and the pain of the sanc; then stop, and remove the ventouses, and take care of the condition of the bodies, for there are some who have bitter heart: so it is necessary to stab once only, and to make deep wounds, and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the sun is thick, it is necessary to stab twice: the first time to soften the path of the thick sanc.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if he is very thin, then it is necessary to hurt him for the third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we must press hard only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to draw blood repeatedly, then we should do so often; and if he is thin, then we must press hard completely, and the end should be that the pulse be felt abruptly,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and cover those who have thick and tough skin, and who are rough, so that you rub the areas with oil that opens and dissolves:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in an ivory case, of oil of mustard, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	and if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of amber, or of balsam, or oil of fennel, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	and if the one who suffers from acute heat and wide pores, then it is not necessary to put oil on,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the exposure to warm water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have moisture from the mouth, if they rise thus, or from water of mirth, and from sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses rise up from old wine, or from water of oak, or from a infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and they should not go out into the sun before a bath or take a bath, but an hour or two after; and they should not sleep after wind-sucking.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be washed, when he needs to be wind-sucked, and when he has been wind-sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against those who are coleric, and whose temper is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it happens that he applies cold things, as pomegranates and endive and lettuce to the skin, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and soaking in puddings, and char of chastity, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion, if they apply syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and soaking in puddings, and char of chastity, and moist meats.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and as soon as he begins to breathe heavily, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some people three times or more aniseed or mint before or after wind, to support the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle with the water, but it is necessary only for those who are warm.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The fists that are placed to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and the mids, and the Podagre, and on the belly and the buttocks and the reins and the vagina, because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the outside.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not do so except to draw blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put on the teats when the newborn is healthy; to remove the viscous substance that is in the limb, as we put vipers on the belly and on the breast to reduce the limb.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if by its attractive virtue it may happen that the operation takes place, or it removes the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus does it act when put on the liver and on the gallbladder when there is repressed wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are empty, but never together, and never water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as well as the disease of pleurisy, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water or with water in which herbs suitable for that have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	and has .ij. inches in length and half a palm in diameter, and is placed so that the middle of it is about .i. inch from the edge, as for piercing with an needle,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and of rain, soufflé before so that it does not burn the patient when putting on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a stick of wood or iron, to put a candlestick grip,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they shall be large and small according to the illness and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the plasters for children are other than for old people, and thin ones are other than for fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And must one put this suction cup onto the limb?
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the wax candle or ointment, and place it onto the ventose over the penis that is placed onto the ventose,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the ventose so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it onto the limb, and these two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one sucks, if there is steam, and one puts the ventose;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the poultice often, as you have learned.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	For the wind-pump which has been opened up because of pleurisy, there is no need for a wick or piercing, and it should be placed lightly on the limb only when it is dry;
et c’est li forme:	and this is how it is done:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	For the small members such as lips and teeth, and similar things, where wind-pumps cannot be placed due to their size;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and strip the lees from the wine, as two or three new wineskins, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find them that are in fresh clear waters without danger, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in water in fresh clear water until they are familiar, and do not have anything in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then soak in water from the vein and from the tub, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the lees;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clear, and cheerful, if there is a place where it can be put a suction cup, put it there, because that's worth much more.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the joint then, and then with water, very well, and then press it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the head is too warm after raising the joint, then soak it in cold water, and put a linen cloth on it, and keep it there as long as the blood is stopped;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the blood is multiplied, then put on vitriol powder, or garlic, and similar things, until it is stopped;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Here is the translation of the first line of the text:
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more work to do, so take others without saucing."
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the sausages don't want to take it, so rub the fire on the meat, or you put an needle in it until the sausage comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and soon as they feel the fire, they heat up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are crying, if you powder a little aloe and sawdust, or ash, if they cry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is how the book of fractures begins:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	For in the art of medicine, this chapter is necessary, and it is a cure for broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, dear son, that the wise man will pour this chapter of the book upon him, which he has never seen in any of the ancient books, nor has he read a letter about it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and because of this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing about it, except from the science of ancient books, where I studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and clearly set forth the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the preceding two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the sum of words and the chapters where wisdom is found, and delay on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing totalls him, so as weakness of the corsage, or enfacement, or age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a break, or dislocation, or torsion, or breakage to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing totalls him, so as weakness of corsage, or enfacement, or age; or if his temperature is very low, or too often feverish; and eat cold meats often, this is to say, cold joues, and char of onion and garlic, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fat foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot apoplexy, or an increase of matter in the limb; if the sick person returns to his first state of health.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the sick person with meat that produces great fatness, or viscousness, such as cooked bread and rice and beans and peas and pork and venison and fish and strong wine and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a slow healing of the break begins later and more slowly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot well heal or harden according to their nature because of the loss of members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	But it does not heal, set the broken bone back in place - that is, the thick ribs which join the member together, as it was before; and do not at all take away from its work, and because of this it is necessary to increase the flesh, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that there are different kinds of broken bones in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break in the head is different from the break in the leg, or the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes around the ear, and another one with the thistle, as if it were the size of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if a break with a wound, and a break all over a little slit.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And to each way there is its own tool, and its own implement in the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is known the break of the bone by what its turn is twisted, and wide apart well by the other, and some at the presser of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting of the neck, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may have a twist, or a break, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put medicine on it which comes later, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which comes in the arm, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to make them equal, as well as the bones of the foot come;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if there is a hard swelling, let him not leave it any longer than until the swelling has softened.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then cut it evenly at the top so that you can move it easily and cleanly, and know that the healing of this is easier than the healing of that which has pieces; then hold it in place, as it is appropriate hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there is a broken bone with pieces, and it is healed from one-half to two parts, whether it is the hand or foot, or at the hand, if it is a small limb, or at two strings, or at a string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb back in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member have healed, you do not add anything to them at their place, as it is appropriate for you to make a fire cautery on them, and keep from your work so that there is no injury or pain to the patient.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and well set together the .ij. shoulders of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if it is held firmly, and does not strain too much, do not press it as they do who make an incision in an abscess, hot and contracted in the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in order, if you teach the patient that he not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, unless it is a little, and the necessary thing is to put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and make sure he is straightened correctly so that twisted movement does not come about when he is healed;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are different in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	Car il y a petits membres, si comme bras et doigt et semblas: si convenent envelopper drapeaux de lin moult et subtils.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those who are fat, so like a thigh and a leg: it is convenient to envelop in a broad and tough yarn, for wide yarns embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no foulness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie it lightly, 2 or 3 times around the limb according to its size, and strain your hand at one end of the yarn, then go up to the break and strain less, so that the break is a little distant from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you press a great deal of the sound part, then take .i. another ligament, and turn quickly on the broken side again;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the sore part of the break, and hold it gently, not too hard or too lightly, as we said in the first ligament above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the tied ligaments of linen or drapes, until they are all equal, then tie them together well above  .i. bandage, and then put your well-made braces on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on the affected area something that cools and calms the swelling, and lets it rest for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain them on your rafters, and be they of half a yard in length, cut from a beam, or from a palm log, and be they according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the rafters that one puts on the break are a little larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be they also as long as necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then strain them on your rafters as you did with the first lath, then tie them together with a thread running horizontally, as you did with the first lath:
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	The smaller it is, the better; and the string should neither be too thin nor too thick, and should be made of linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the string is too thick, as I have seen with some of the poor craft who make their laces out of twisted linen string, and that is a great mistake, for the lace cannot be even if it is too thin, and should not have more than two spaces between each thread.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is hit by the ends of the strings after they are cut and in their bones, then wrap them in linen cloth or another soft fabric so that they do not bruise.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is exposed to the air, and the bandage has been torn off, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to extract all the bones from the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not good to put in slings before 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess which has broken out suddenly;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and take flour which is well-sifted and mixed with much ash, and make this composition, not too thin nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common method of theemplastriers in restoring the breach to many conditions, most of all to women and small children, for it is not good to be too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method ofemplastriers in restoring the breach, dislocation and torsion: take 250 grams of alkanet root and 250 grams of danewort and aniseed and ash and gum arabic and myrrh and aloe, 750 grams; grind it into a powder, and mix it with much egg white; this composition of the flesh is warm, so use this emplaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones safely, and is useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make plasters that is effective for torsions: take mugwort and vismar (wool fat), 10 z. mirr (mirrh) and 70 z. of aloes, acacia 6 z.; grind it well, and confit with vinegar or a lot of honey, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to make plasters for dislocated joints and broken bones that are out of place, which soothes the pain immediately and properly heals the fracture: take another new wool, and grind it with water and oil, and put it on the joint. Such plasters do not return to their original form, but they are good for soothing hot fractures and properly healing the break.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make plasters that heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to make plasters for the restoration of broken bones and to soothe the remaining part of an abscess: take roots of vismar, chamomile, violets, wheat flour, and each in equal parts; grind them together, and confit with wine, and when the members are warmed up, use aconfited with coriander juice or water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to poultice more strongly than the first, when the duration of the restoration of the limb comes. Take roots of marsh-mallow, and seeds of flax, balsam, melilote, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each in a part; and grind them, and confect them with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras says that you should not put anything on the broken member for restoring it more strongly than a wax and oil cerot, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that you should put on the broken member, for restoring, dry things that are a little warm, such as mirr and aloe, and incense, and similar things, such as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to poultice that is good for a wound and pain: take mugat and wool of sheep, or feathers of owl, and marsh-mallow, and thread it evenly, and grind them, and make a poultice with it, and put it on.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then carefully loosen a little at a time, and watch the patient not feel any pain, nor does the jaw move out of place; if you loosen it by hand day after day
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, or feels tense or swollen, if you hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip into water, and raise up the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then leave the member resting for an hour, then put on another dry one, soaked in water or oil and tied with a ribbon, until you are sure the blister is warm;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and rest the inflammation of the member, and be relieved of pain, then start again gently, and a little plaster, and do not loosen it too much as before; and gently until it is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen all over, you must apply poultices and binding, if it begins again, as you did at first with equal care.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the member at all as we have said, then do not separate it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it for more than ten days, according to what is seen, until the fracture has healed and the joint has approached the bone.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then increase the restraint more than before, and let it fatten its meat as I have said before; and if you see that the joint is drying up more than necessary, know that there can be no healing. Then leave it for a while longer, as it is good to prolong the time of treatment;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then every day raise it with warm water, and let it rest for a while, and then apply the poultice with olive oil;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work therefore cut off the member without delay, and break up very well what it has done wrong; for it is evil, and if it is done with fear, I see nothing else but to let go and do it rightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of breaking in various ways
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are various methods of breaking, and there are various shapes, and the causes are divided;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For it has breaks that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collar bone all the way down to the hip which is the end of the bone, so as to make such a break; and for this reason this method of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure « absolue » ; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite .
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	If there is a collision that becomes stuck, or a break, or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing break that approaches the ligament that holds the bone together, or that is on the bone itself, and this wound is either great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that enters the bone as finely as a thread of hair, and this break is small, and for this reason it is called a "capillary break".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and causes a piece of bone to enter the body, and the head of the bone becomes bent in such a way as the smith does when he smashes the metal on the anvil; then it enters between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens to those who have a wet skull bone, so that the skull is like a child's skull;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and these are the various ways in which fractures occur, just as small pieces of wood do; and I will now speak about them in detail.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	and let us know all the types of fractures by their traction, and by the probe, and by the corrupt chisel that is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by what happens when you discover the bone and rub it over, thus opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, be careful of accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, stretching, palmations, feverish ague, and hairs standing on end, and other similar things in multiple conditions, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navel comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, then you must hurry to cut the bone by the seventh day, so that the tissue surrounding the bone decays, and the accident we have described comes about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the bone fracture occurs up to the point where the tissue that covers the skull is broken, then you must split the damaged part thus: and it is that you press the head of the patient hard, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more smoothly than you can,
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the blood flow occurs upon uncovering the bone, or an abscess, you must help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the space with wet cloth soaked in oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calm, and are sure of blood flow; then begin to cut the bone, and it is done according to 11 ways: one way is that you chop at the narrow end first, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I cut another, just as long as the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different lengths, some are long and others short, and they are pointed, and of iron made; and work quickly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it inside, as well as you bring threads with thorns, not completely through so that they do not pass beyond the bone's spine, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, that does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place at the edge of the bone, so that you have threads for all test: and this is the form of the three methods of threads.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And the quality to pierce inside the bone is that you put one thread on the bone, and turn it twice until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the thread a little further away, and do so all around, then cut with scissors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do so more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or in any of the tools that you have like pliers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the skull nor the sinews.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, if you perceive that you retain the grit of the bone in all.i. other instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be softer and thinner than the other incision;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it retains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, if the bone is slightly damaged by an instrument; then heal the wound with the ointment and oil that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of preparation, which is more effective, as Galen says, and it is this: cut the meat very thinly, and then make a poultice with it,
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have discovered this part, you place the tip of this lens-shaped incision on it:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side, and is the part of water in 1.2 sides, so that the cutting is next to the bone; then proud of a small mallet on top, so that you lightly hit the bone all around, and you are well guarded by the cloth that is desoz;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, so the bone is lightly hit, because the bone hurts well, and does not fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone does not break through the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover them with a sharp razor that you must have in different quantities, to arrange in each case the most convenient one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have a lot of sharp razors, and then some sharper ones, and never stop doing this as long as it is good.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle injuries, you must bring forward according to its treatment; and this is something that has not yet been answered to those who have put their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the plague is uncovered, it is necessary that you press .i. a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil and put it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 3, and dip it in wine and oil and put it on the first cloth; and do it more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the plague, then apply it above the other linen, and do not strip it off except to moisten the wound only;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it like this for 1 or 2 days until the abscesses are calm, then remove it, and apply medicines as roots of plants, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and apply medicines to it constantly without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and keep the wound clean and dry, so you don't let it get dirty, nor do you let it come together with the bow, for when the bow comes together with the cloth of the skullcap, if it is too tight and sharp, and comes to the patient with great harm; for when one puts on a mordant thing, if it stops above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, so that no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if black poison comes only because of the medicine that we have put on it, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and glop 1 drapelet, and put it on the medicine.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it in the way that suits you, until it is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Saiches that no time are broken the 17 parts doun of the neck above, or him by li soulement, for these are 17 bones; and this desoz is cartilaginous, and breaks not, unless it be forced or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the 17 parts is broken, it is appropriate that you tap your little finger or hole on the neck, and fit the break evenly with your ring finger, and from the side, until the neck regains its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, it is appropriate that you make it even at the top of a small finger.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if his break is of a third part, then make another, and hasten to restore the first the next day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscesses at the base are calm, then tie with linen cloth at the top of the shoulders the tents of tendrils, if his break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you tie another one from another part, if his break is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the openings of the necks.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And do not say that there is no need to moisten the tents in the preparation of oak gourd and powder of mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And in no way do they use goose feathers instead of tent-fabric, and if it is .i. a soft drape that wraps around, and the wind blows through it, and makes the disease spread among the sick; or you will see such and such a thing happen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses open up while you are operating, put cotton dipped in oil or  .i. a little drop of aquilon on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscesses do not open up, put an ointment made of semolina flour and incense powder, mixed with rabbit's fat, then put it on light bandages and do not tie it too tightly;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the nose is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract with suitable instruments at this time, and mend the break, and treat things that might get stuck in it, and bandage firmly, and apply ointments and oils suitable for this;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he has no pain inside his neck at all, so that the cure of tenures, and I put chains of plunging, until it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only a little one, and it is not broken into two pieces, except that it is bent inside, then you must know that it is a light fracture.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger from your right hand into the mouth, and push the fracture gently inside, and make it equal with your left hand from outside, and adjust it lightly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there is a break in the jaw, it is repaired with .ii. parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement of the teeth, or fracture, then strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put on the broken jaw with wax, and put on 1 drape double; and put on the drape a large well-made plate, or a piece of leather that is even, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it to the muscled part that you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape has changed, then wait three days, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on, of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg or flour of chaff, after you have removed the wax; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster sets, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it for as long as it is healthy; many times it is healthy in 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses break out, then do what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, make no piece of the bone into the bone; but if it is subtle, use the instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, if you widen it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have joined all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, and put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent infection, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	Force him gently.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Forces him to break several times before, over the shoulder, and the rupture is according to .iij. ways: or it is broken and dislocated in .ij., and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a rupture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is so when the rupture is without a wound, that you have 2 ministers, so that one damps the shoulder that is forced to break; and the others extends the neck towards the part; then make even the rupture on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to extend further, so put a round staff of cloth or linen on the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and tighten and hold the staff with your hand, so that you make even the rupture, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from behind, so that it comes out completely, then let the patient lie on his side, and put the ministers' shoulder forward, and have them hold the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then set the break on your two sides, and if you find debris, so it is convenient that you split it up; and gently twist the pieces, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, so the cap is to one of those who cut it; but that you put away this instrument, so that the medicine does not lose its effectiveness.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and seems like a spoon, and is not a claw, and is also wide enough for the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has .ij. chisel, as you see, and one is large and the other small, as is the break in the wound that you have made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of the wound, if it is hot, and the break is small, or if you doubt about the heat of the wound, if it is wrapped in blankets and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And when hot wounds come, if you wrap one drape in oil and another in milk and wine, and put them on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it is without pain and without wound, is that you put on the bone the plaster from the powder of the mill and the ash of eggs, and put thereon light staples, and put a spike desos on it if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very strong band of one palm wide, then put thereon two drapes double, and plaster it; then take a thin stake of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band, so that the head of the band is hanging down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	Then put the stake on the break, and turn the band around the neck, and fasten the assel with a spike, and unfasten the assel that is ill; and reset it every day, and when you see that the band holds well ahead of the stake, and you clearly see that the stake does not move on the broken bone, then reset it; and if it slips, then restrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	And make the ill one sit up with his back against the wall, and let him put a little peg under his armpit for support, so that the dislocation goes up by the force of the shoulder; or you tie his arm to his neck, and do not unbind it unless there is a bad accident, until 20 days have passed.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	puis recommence la plastre, si tu vois qu'il y ait besoin, et l'étanche et le laisse ainsi, tant qu'il soit guéri; et il est guéri au plus en .xxviij. jours, et en moins à certains hommes.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	For the shoulder to be properly healed, it must be kept in the middle and only moved by touch; then arrange it according to its shape after the fracture, and return it to its natural position, in all ways that you can; then put on a double drape of powder from the mill with much flour, and light ones, and put on 1. double drape; then put on a wide and thin plate, slightly wider than the shoulder, and remove the plate if it presses on the shoulder, but use hair from the plate so that the plate sits evenly; and then tighten it firmly so that the plate does not move at all, and check it every day; and whenever it becomes loose, tighten it again, and put the plate back in place if it has moved out of position, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder is healed in about 20-25 days. And when these numbers are completed, if he still needs to be held in place, be sure, for this is not bone that will heal lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone comes loose, do not remove it, but join it back on, and make sure that the joint moves smoothly; and follow what we said about breaking the shoulder to ease the joint's pain.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks at the end; and when it is broken in the middle, if it tilts downward, the patient feels great pain, and lack of support, and sometimes vomits blood, and feels pain all over his body, and especially in the bones.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lie down on his back, and you place him .i. cubit between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and align the ribs with your hands, and carefully put him in position so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then wrap him in a thin cloth, and cover it with soft salt (or another light substance), and tie it firmly to the spine, and tighten it hour by hour, and if it relaxes, you tighten it again; and if it needs to be loosened, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, do so quickly, and remove the wrapping, and treat it with remedies; then wrap him up again, and hold him fast until he is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Saiches that the breaker of the ribs comes only in large ones behind the back, and at the head inside, and does not bend too much for what they are dry; and the sense is good to the inquiry with both.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And if he has been injured, restore it so that it is even, as it should be. And then apply the plaster, and hold him by a staff, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the ribs are broken and turn inward, the patient will feel great pain and ache, as if he were crying, for the bone rubs against the membrane; and he becomes pale, and his breath is short, and it causes great pain in the body, and the old ones have put a lot of effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among these who serve is one who can administer meat that swells the stomach, to push the break away from the back.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, except that warm abscesses come, if it is not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then the health.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that we put cups on the head, to suck out the fluid, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, doubt I have that the cup draws out the excesses to the head for a weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one must cover the head with another dry cloth, and put oil between the ribs to equalize the heat, then cure it of the plague cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that points to the wound, there is doubt in the patient; so it is necessary to split the skin above the broken rib, and put there an instrument to ward off the evil one; then one must break the bone, and pull gently, and afterwards sew together the two lips of the wound, if they are wide, and treat with plasters until he is well. And when the abscess comes out, so put on damp liniments in oil and place them; and cure while the time of that which needs an abscess, and be gentle on his rib where it should be, until he is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time passes without breaking the bone of the neck, and soon it will hurt; and also at the back of the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see whether he will be healed or not, if his hands become soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with an needle, know that it is mortal in many dispositions; and if they mute and feel well when stretched and pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, unless you set him cur.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if there is a similar thing coming out of the back, then you must know whether it is healthy or not, and if the pains are softened, and if the accident that happened was caused by what was in his hands, and the windiness and excretion without will on his back, and when he is soothed with it on his belly, if there is no excretion without will. And when it is soothed on his back, and it tightens, then it cannot be. Know that it is fatal: do not work in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come from him, then this thing is the lightest.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess, put oil of roses or oil of meadow on it until it is calm; then put it on a compress and dry it, tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain until he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are dislocated, then cover it with oil; and break the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then apply ointment with charcoal until it is healthy; and if the chiès de la kowe (chiès de la cowe, or chiès de la coué) is broken, which means that the hand is dislocated, hold it with your left hand, and put the splint on it with your right hand, then tie it, and if there are any bones that have come loose, then fix them in place, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	There was a chance that the bone of the hip might be broken, and if so, it would not be too much of an issue unless there is some slight reduction at the head; and let it grow long, and decline to the back, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and swelling, and fever where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are on top of the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the head in the middle, so make the break equal as much as it can be in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inwardly, so make the patient walk on her belly, as soon as the restoration of that break has been arranged for her.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you put it on the plaster, then put it on a beam of wood or timber, and hold the broken part steady so that it does not move; and fix the place of the joint by the sides, until the place is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess develops again, without pricking it, until the abscess has healed, and then apply the method we have just described; then return to the cure, and hold it as needed, and there is no evil accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder; and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of these two ways: which one is that you take a strong stick according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	The shoulder joint is what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder; and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of these two ways: which one is that you take a strong stick according to this form: And lie in four ties, and tie them high, and cut the patient on the side; then cast the limb down upon the fust, so that he comes into position, and has one fust underneath him; then place the broken member equal to his hands together, until the broken member returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other way is that you place the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then order two ministers that one hold what is on the broken member at their hands, and the others extend each leg to its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too hard, then stretch out one leg of the patient to its side, and another toward his back, and extend each leg to its side; and if the broken member is near the top of the shoulder, then it is good that you put one leg easily, without labor, so that the broken member is even on its place, and on its neck; then stretch out equally the broken member, as it should, and extract it, if the joints are not too tight.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscesses come, do not extract them until .vij. days; and put on a wet cloth in oil of roses as long as the abscesses are calm; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the break; then raise the arm with the help, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the lou; and wrap it up, and extract it with the aid, and with the arms so that the arm is in its place, if nothing hurts it or if the bone does not break.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use aids, and put on the break a larger and stronger nail than the others, and have between each nail 2 inches of space, and let each nail be so large that it goes through the break 2 nails from each side; then extract by means of these nails, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the break, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the nails and the extraction, as we have said, in the day that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the abscess hot, let it remain tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each 2 days whether it swells or not, so that the re-setting does not come to the member because it is too tight. If it does not set, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such an accident does not occur, then let it not be released until after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and he places the aid with a cushion of equal wool, and looks every hour during the day or night, that the form of the member does not move, nor are the ligaments softened; if it is administered by virtue of medicine, and gives him the food which we have put before in a certain way so that the food is at the first subtle layer; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is custom that the aid and leg should be recovered in ten days; and then it must be released and administered baths and medicines of ointments to address the stiffness. And if the stiffness is ugly and blocked, let it be held for a year or more.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fociles," one small and one large, with the small being at the top and the large being at the bottom; or sometimes both may break, and sometimes both may be whole.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the little ones are bruised, the healing is light, and the cure; and when the big ones are bruised, such a healing is ill, and more painful than when they are bruised all together. If it is only the little one that is bruised, then the pot that is to be used is to be lightly extended, and made equal.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is only the big one that is bruised, then the pot that is to be used should be more strongly extended; and extend it on the .i. side, and turn the poucht of the hand higher up than the others, and the little ones lower down than the others, and let the patient lie across it, and the .i. side before it higher up than the other side, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the assistants by their arms to the part under their hand, or to the leg, and other assistants above. And then make the pot equal, according to its better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break there are pieces, let each one be put in its place, and if any of them do not hold a good position, and you cannot restore it to its place, then set it on top of the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; so take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, on lui tire les yeux qui ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is fitting that you wet the member with hot water until the itchings are calm; and let the member rest without constraint. And then begin again with the tightening, and if the ligaments are soft and the bones desevred, and similar things, if you adjust them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the member is too tight, so that the tightening cannot come to it, then it is fitting that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the tightening comes; and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then don't stop until .xx. days. or it is not resolved, then he puts his hands on his throat, and keeps his neck straight, and guards against movement and damage, and sleeps on his back; and know that this breaker is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on our two hands there are few breaks, and comes only a little sometimes.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, so that the patient feels pain, and sits straight before him evenly; then he puts his hand on the table extended, and extends the members of the broken bones, and puts them together evenly, until they are well joined; and he puts the plaster and the bandages, if there is any injury, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the place; and it is wrapped in .i. linen sheets.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks inside the garden of the plant between the navel and loins, then make a spear of linen, and command the patient to strangle it at his broken plant; and then draw it out with a long cloth, and let the steel of a few softs also be as large as the plant in the palm, and draw it out, as it befits.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the back, then it is necessary that you put a steel on, and another in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop up the vein between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks on one of the two, then he should be made equal, as it befits; and draw it out with the plant, and if you see that you cannot lift the break by itself, then put a small right steel to lift the break, so it does not move; and if the break is on the other two, as in the index or the one on the other side, make them equal, and tie them together holding them tight, so they do not move; or you should all hold them together, so that they are comfortable, or you should put a steel on, as it was said; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and help those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	And from the broken chest
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot be reset, so it keeps coming out of place with slight movement; this causes pain and injury.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lays down on his face, then extends the arms to each side evenly; and it is when the fracture has broken the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, then one of the links is towards the knuckle and the other link is above the break; and if it is near the hip, then the links are extended upwards and downwards; then the physician aligns the bone evenly with his two hands according to its natural shape, and then applies the plaster, and ties it, except for the apostemes [small joints] which come later.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it rest then return to your treatment and work; the course of action is done in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the break . i.e. bandage hard double in .ij. or .iij., and stop the excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the birth, and put .i. a long thread between the buttocks and the leg, taking off the knee cap, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the buttocks the bandage, then put on the break plates, and put a plate on the bone of the leg; then employ the place empty between the leg and the buttocks of drapes soft to put even the binding, then begin to bind .iij. twists or iiij. on the break; and when you go up more on the break, and less the binding; then tie the 2 esteles that are above, then go back to the knee cap at the head of the thread, as long as you come away from the foot; and the binding, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if it comes no aposteme or swelling or other apparent.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it should happen that he falls and turns over this one that comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold, if it is necessary to bend the place, and pull hard; and heal him as we have said, until he is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And in no way is the buttocks broken when we put plates there, as in the support of the arm; nevertheless, in this restoration made, the patient does not cry out.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the scar is healed in .l. days, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	For in the knee joint there is sometimes a slight injury, but it often heals. And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a split, and not a wound, and one feels no pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration shall be so that one who is bent on his two sides is made equal again, as much as possible; then apply plaster and put a smooth plate on it, if you need to, and fasten it with rope or string, as we have said for other fractures, whether in the head or elsewhere. So treat each accident as it requires, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	That there are .ij. bones in the leg; so that one is called by right "mustelz", and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are like those of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as with that of the arm in equal fashion, and the wounds are all like.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones break together, then the leg turns on every side.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bones break, then the leg turns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, if one feels great pain and sees it clearly, then return to the dislocation. Then put in extension, and make it even, and bind the bones evenly; yet, however, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are many pieces, so let the extension be smaller and lighter; and make it even according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, if there are 13 hair braids that purple the leg on one side and the other, and are long from the knee to the heel; then wrap them in 13 leashes above and below, and bind this bundle in the middle, and at this binding no leg shall hang downward to the right or left, and so it is good; and there let be 13 braids of hair on the leg, and if it is long, and put the leg to rest by warding off movement, and properly do I put one in the fracture or wound; and move each day the leg, that we may see if there is an abscess or another accident; then heal as long as he is well.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bone of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle comes no fracture, but at the bone of the foot comes a fracture once and twice, and there is no more to come unless it is broken in various ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it should happen that the bones of your foot are broken, and you see those bones coming together, put yourself down on the ground like one who wants to go, and then now put your foot on its side, where the bones have risen up, and press them until they come back into their place; then apply the poultice and put it on top of that, and put a small flat piece of wood in front of the foot's stomach; there will be 10.1 inches between the two ends. Then tie the bandages tightly around the foot, and all other things as you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the swelling goes down, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, set them back in place, as we have said for the hands; then put a piece of wood on each of the two according to their length, and let it be slightly larger, then put the poultice on top of that, wrapped in one.1 yards of linen, and tighten the bandages on the foot; and let the belly of the poultice be under the foot, so that it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget any of the other things that we have said for breaking bones; and attend to each accident as it arises.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone soft hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's natural bone is broken, if she is seated enlarged, then she is inclined to the back part of the spine, and held behind; then fill the nature with cotton, and also put as much as 1/2 pound; then stand the woman, and gently push her spine a little at a time, and then let the cotton fall, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the spine; and when she urinates, if she pushes out the cotton, and when she has finished urinating, then put it back, and in this way make 21 days or so: then will be restored the break, and if there is pain, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a cord to the hernia, and pour all the bladder into nature; then blow into the cord forming, until the bladder is inside: nature will then return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the hand of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and work there, and hears my book. For the break signifies many things to the right way of restoration: hear then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the hymen, when it is broken, take a bladder of goose and fill the hymen; then wrap towels around, and leave them for .iij. days or so, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of rupture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have a rupture with wound, even if it is great, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, let it be healed now, so that the healing we have described testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you have nothing else, then start restoring the rupture in that very hour, or that day, unless the abscesses come to a head.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses come to a head, and you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm, and do not touch them on the third day or the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek, so that you put it gently with your hands to its tip, little by little.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal in length to your hands, then take this instrument made of iron which is 5.25 inches long and its width is determined according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary that he immerse three or four times, according to what is needed in each cure of a fracture; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your opening, and be sharp at the front and thick at the middle from before:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "palainche," for the broken shoulder should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and it should be hit once, as long as it revives, and they are even one against the other. And if the fracture is slight, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you should chip off the head of the bone until the instrument can take hold of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then chip off one side of it with an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, with your power; and then take that which is left on the bone and cut little by little.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is set and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then moisten it with wine-styptic black dye and clean it properly if it is stained; and do not put tar or anything else on it where there is oil, lest it cause inflammation and corruption; then administer poultices when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not stretched with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the sick person, either dead or腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に腐敗した時に
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that bad accidents will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, it is not right to put stilt on; but wrap it up, instead of stilt, hard drapes, and tie it. And when you see after 1 .i . day or 1 .ij . encumber bow with the wound, if he who has been put on all comes off, and sets the healing bandages, as the healing four-part bandage and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb three times a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and restored.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow moves easily and lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if a main passes through, and it cannot be made firm but comes off again in pieces, knowing that there are small pieces of bone, so you must patch up the wound with stitches, and all these pieces that come out causing pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula appears at the place, or other corruption, it is necessary that you heal it according to what he said in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as the bone of the hip or shoulder, and others like large limbs, do not pull it out, because many times death comes, but leave it until it decomposes; perhaps it will come back later.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of the bruces that come from the sudor
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the bruised person, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the member's form; and perhaps can not make their natural movements.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care, therefore, that we are well: if the medicine is stinging, as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarc kolle, acacia, and similar things, so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine of stinging oil or with a lot of smoke or with honey; and put them on the knot in piles, and bind them well, and do not remove them for many days; and then remove them, and start again on another one, until the nodulation is hard; or you bind it to a piece of cork well made; for the quality of cork is that it hardens all the swelling above the members; and if the nodulation is hardened, it is necessary to cut off the surplus, or else you will have to remove it with a razor, until it is hard, and then cure it until it is well.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the stay
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break in the bone is healed, and remains after weak and thin members, so happened for various reasons: because one was too tightly tied, and was not tied as it should have been; or because he had too many ligatures, and could not bring relief to the member; or because of many scar tissues; or because of too great movements, not in their right time; or because he had little blood in his body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat well, and make the body flexible, until the blood multiplies in it; and give him baths, and give him joy and rest; then put wax on the member so that the wax attracts much blood, and rinse it often with warm water, so that the blood runs to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted member after the stay
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And in no case should the bone be moved to rub continuously and extensively with moist hands. And let there be no continuous and prolonged movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the torture is too great and hard, as in the case of stones, then it must be opened with a sharp and light knife; and put a poultice and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation results from a joint moving out of its normal position, which prevents the joint from moving properly, resulting in abnormal limb positioning and causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at any joint, if you bring it back into place immediately without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if you delay it, and the joint swells, and by chance put it back in place; for this causes great pain and other troubles to come about.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, if the disease is not yet well-established, then treat the patient and let it be until the abscesses are calm; then heat the member with hot water and oil, then gently move it, and heal each member as healing arrives in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the ointments for dislocations of the shoulder joint just until the pain.
des mandibules	the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	when the mandibles have been dislocated a little, and the dislocations of both are according to 1.2 manners: where they are a little osteotic from their places, and are softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the loins, and turn the saliva out of the mouth so that it cannot be held, nor can it close its mouth, and wrap its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are small, then return to many other dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it in the hospital right away, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this manner that the minister holds the head of the ill person, and drips mirrhe from one of his hands on the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, then the dislocation is of a j.j. parts; and command to the illness that he softens, his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And pour the mirrhe equal, until it regains its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if they are brought back, most certainly it is because the two jaws are put together again; and if they are raised with hot water and oil, so that they are brought back lightly; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softener, put it on drapes soaked in wax made from oil and beeswax, then leave it lightly while it softens them.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the sick person sleep on his back, and his shoulders between two pillows, so that he does not move or strive to turn over, but eat soft food, until the pains are gone and the jaws have healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then cut it easily, and do not work to open the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the .ij. jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and the usual heat come, and by chance there is a solution of the abdomen, and sometimes vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a loss; and many die in .viiij. days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot dislocate due to the costiveness within the continuation of it and from the top, and is dislocated only once at the end, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; and then he presses the joint against your palm, and it will come back; then put the plaster on and bandage, and hold it fast.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	And the shoulder that is towards the chest cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated once, you bring it back to its place as we have said; then put the plaster on and the bandage, and hold it fast, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in this way you also bring back the head of the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Saiches that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: either because it has dislocated from the part of the clavicle to the dislocation; and the second is to the part of the back; and by chance dislocates from the upper part, and this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck; and many times dislocates out towards the clavicle, but at those who have little money, for it is necessary to go to hospital; and at those who have enough money, but go slowly, and return slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance there are some men who have a punch or a blow, and warm the shoulder with a hot poultice, and think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It therefore comes that you should test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And this is how the text continues:
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and dislocate the shoulder at the joint with the arm as if it were one body; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his side, nor move in any way.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated upwards, so it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly at the joint;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this way of dislocation is not excepted when it is new, or when the person is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers raise the hand of the sick person above, then put the splint out of the socket, and raise the joint with force to its place; and the ministers raise the hand, and extend it above, then put it out; so comes a sudden pain.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said by hand in two days after, then it is appropriate that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister should apply softening and soothing remedies, so as to make a decoction of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and apply it.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	and then the sick person should be massaged on his back, and a splint of another equal, not too soft nor too hard, should be put on the shoulder; then the minister should raise the heel of the hand of the sick person with force, and draw the chief of the shoulder gracefully, and hold the hand of the sick person.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and others ministers blacken the shoulder of the disease, so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see if you do so according to this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and that you make present .i. a man who is greater than the patient; and is right towards the coast, and bottle so the shoulder dislocates of the patient's shoulder, and lift up the shoulder upwards, so that the patient hangs down by the arm; and li estre le plus a l'armure du malaide si que li armour ne se meuve tant qu'il est en l'espaule desoz.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and others ministers draw the arm of the disease down towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then go with him something heavy and bring the dislocation back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the ram on also another way: and is that you stick  .i. long splinter in the ground, whose head is also as a pistol, and is not too big nor too small; and li ram qu’il soit en ceste maniere:
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	And then let the disease be put down, but that it have a drape of wool over it, and the disease be in the long furrow; then his hand is stretched out from one side to another forming, and the joint returns to its place at length.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood from the arm of a great tree and two fingers wide, which has the head resting on it so that it can enter fully into dislocation, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then put it on the top of the wood, so that the disease does not burn the patient, then put it into dislocation; and extend your arms up the long side of the wood, and set the shoulder on the wood, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stone of the size of a stone, and let it hang down from one side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way, then put on the shoulder a piece of wool that is equal, and set the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and alum, all over the shoulder and around, then strain it out of dislocation facing forward, and tie the bond to the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck little by little as the limbs are comfortable, for they will heal more quickly; and then suck more after a few days or so, and move them; and if they are stiffened and not softened, then they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place by moisture that has come or by some other cause, then you must apply the cautery to three quarters, as it is placed in front or with the paste of the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after five or six days the joint does not hold and the arm cannot raise it, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never been placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is opposite the loins and breasts, or behind, is made by impact, and the extending of hands, and you administer another place; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes stiffness in the limb, and a late movement, then the patient often uses it again until that stiffness is relieved and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation at the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Sache that the joint at the shoulder is dislocated at the base, and returns to its place; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we can see and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy side, if you can see it openly. For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, or touch its shoulder from all sides.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you bring them back in this way as well as the apothecary's leg comes out, for if the apothecary's leg comes out, there will be great grief in bringing it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back from all and every part, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and is of great pain, and by chance it brings death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your .ij. hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands at the elbow behind and in front of the body, and bend the joint to its palm root together, or at its base, as soon as it comes back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, return when it doubles its hand to its root, and keep the elbow behind the body.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, give a strong extension; and there are two who extend the arm, and tint them together, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arms of each part, then you have wrapped a double long and wide drape.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he holds his hand at the joint to the oil, if it is not oiled to smooth out the joint, then make the joint firm, until it comes back;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, if put on dry plaster with honey and oil, and strained firmly, and bent the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leaves it for some days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it again, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with the plaster and the lien, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly placed; then loosen it again.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or put on the joint a layer of sheep's fat, then leave it. day and night, then wash it, and make him enter or bath
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, he gently rubs the joint, then puts the nail back on, and then into or bath; and so does .ij. times or .iij., until he is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet cloth heated with butter, and strain it up; so will it return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand should be reset quickly, while it is still dislocated, so that its place is not lost; also, if the fingers are swollen or if there is heat.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And if you put the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers, and look at it so that it is even; then put your palm against the joint, and squeeze it until it comes back.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	"If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back hand on the table, and then have them put their hand in the appearance of the joint. If it goes back into place now, it is good."
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	"If not, if you cut the abscess gently, and let it rest in this way, then let it move freely."
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	"And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, then let the joint twist."
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and don't hurt the patient until his hands are wet, and can not extract anything at all: so you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; if there is no other way to extract it by fire cautery, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, put on the plaster as we said above, then extract it and leave it there .v. days, then release it and let it be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it properly, and there is no fracture, if the joint is wet with warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No times is dislocated the two sides of the hand to each part, no times at the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then are they two, and bottle the dislocation to your fists until he comes back, then hold fast the head of the two, and the pull towards the part where it is joined;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave .ij. days, and then put it equal this day; and of not the leg, so com we have said, and the un-leg from day, and the move it, and the tie again; and do this often, until he is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same, if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and do so com you have done before, until it is well; and do the same, when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for it quickly leads to death.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excrements come out without will, they cannot be held, and many times a member is softened or weak, or the two arms or one arm or .j. legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the head becomes mute in three parts; that which is mute at the back is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If it is because you have stunted your growth from childhood, then there is no cure or healing for you completely.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those who come from falls or blows or similar things, the old ways of treatment with big words were that they did not do any good at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have simplified them according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the stunting that comes before this, there is no cure or healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and so I say that comes straight into two sides, and cannot be cured except for the one properly which comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and so that the patient is laid on his back in an even position, and has his hair cut short, so that he does not get injured;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	and then put 1 log of wood under his head, and 1 log beside him, and tie a rope around the patient's neck, and 1 at the hips, and 1 between the knees, and 1 between the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other beside him, among the 2 logs;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well sealed, the twig as we have said, and the mirror puts his palms on the spine to form, until he regains.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not recover with this cure, take a table of three arms long, and cut out the wall, and let the patient lie on one side, and dip the top of the table cut out on the wall, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put the mirror's palms on the other end of the table, and press firmly until he regains his position; and if you see that it hurts, do it with care at first so that the pain does not increase.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And place two torches at the end of the patient's head with one arm, and between each torch, and facing outward, a palm's width apart;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and place each log .i. one upon the other, or they turn around, and the logs are firmly on the ground so that they do not move; and between each of them  .ij. logs there is a small log .i. turning, for they tie them together, and in the  .ij. twists  .ij. small logs put one palm-length long logs to turn around the twist;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the one who is between them to the twist at the top, and the other tie at the other twist, and each of the ministers twists his own twist on all of the logs, and the master sets the stake equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, put on dried herbs with a lot of ash, and then the stakes, and then the tablet of 1.ij. feet long, that he may put the leach on the top of the gibbet and the part of the spine healthy, then the line of a log, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle leaching, until it is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes at the end of health, so administer soft and soothing medicines with the tablet that we have said above; and never give a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come in the rear spine of the back, and thought to be dislocations; and that is the bone which opens, so that one must not have presumption: by adventure it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	For the joints of the hip and shoulder come out only as dislocations, not at all like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parties: within and without, before and behind; and more within, and less before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of their dislocations within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy, it is further away, and opens more the sick knee than the healthy, and cannot double the sick knee on fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the head which is dilated inflamed abscess hot, because that the shoulder of the cockerel comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that to which it goes away, if this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that which comes before, if he has a good leg according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, it does not double its knee with pain, and if one makes it walk, it cannot go forward, and holds back its urine, and swells up the ankle, and when it walks, it goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that which comes behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the head of the shoulder is at the place of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	For if the patient has had this type of dislocation before and it takes a long time to heal according to its condition, then there is no cure; and it is only right that one should be cautious.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this one where the dislocation is recent, and it is of the three types of dislocations, if you hurry to reset the joint, and push it back inside and pull it out again, moving it from side to side; perhaps it will go back into place, and there is no need for any further cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not go back into place in this way, you should use very strong medicine, and firmly support the leg with both hands, or a strong ligament tied to the knee joint;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand above it in such a way that he can press his hands together, then ties the ligature across the thigh; and another minister ties the knot of the ligature;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend up and down all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is so common that there are .iiij. resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then you must put the cure on the patient's back, then place the bandage on the root of the loins, and the loop that is at the angle, then extend the bandage upwards towards the angle, and upwards towards the spine; and
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then wrap the patient's arms around the large loop of the bandage, and bring it to the back at a distance: now it returns to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than that of others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the .ij. feet of the sick person together with a strong twine under the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. genitals, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then be hung from the top of a post, and on the ground  .ij. long arms; then order one minister to embrace the top of the hip, and let others hang with the sick person, who embraces the hips tightly, because the joints are now coming back slowly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is away, if the sick person lies down as we have said in that which has giddy-head, and tie one string properly on the sick leg, and on the hip too;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then set   .ij. torches, one at the top and another at the feet, then put one torch between the hips of the sick person at the bottom in the form of a cross;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and put up wet drapes inside, so it doesn't burn the patient, and then place each servant in front of him, and let the doctor put the dislocation on his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it comes back, that's good. If not, put it on a .table, and press it like we said in the book on the neck, and lay the patient on his back.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, extend the leg with pain like I said; and put the doctor's hand on it, then press with the other hand, and bring it towards the hip.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And when the dislocation is on the side, if it can't be extended towards the ground, then it must be extended like we said in the book for sleeping on the left side; and so that the patient' leg is lifted, and the doctor' hand is placed under the thigh; then press with the other hand, and bring it towards the hip.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and lie extended on his face, and must all press together at the joint to the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then remove the bandages, put on the plaster, and extract a toothpick, so that the ankle does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest.iii. days or iii. days, then remove it, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, then extract it as before, and let it be.iii. days; then remove it, and make it bark, until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The genoux is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside, outside, and behind; do not dislocate it in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his knee to his hip, and if it does not bend at the hip, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the reduction of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your knees;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee between your hands, and pull it back between your two, then bend the .ij. ribs from the knee-shape; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux has returned to its place, and the signs are that he bends his knee lightly at the hip;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the paste on top, and make the leg rest in the trough, and fix it together firmly .iii. or iiij. days then let him free; and do not work the patient to walk, until the limbs are comfortable again.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not yet healed, so administer a strong extension, as we said in the treatment of the thigh, until it is well again.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, and they are never completely dislocated inside or outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has been dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The patient should be made to bend if it is light, and it must be gently extended with the hands when it is slightly bent.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has been dislocated from the top, so that you make the patient lie down, and tie him up with a strap around his leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then train the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left, and then extend it upwards, and blow on the foot upwards;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this 19 times, as we said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, then begin again the work, because it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, then bring the sick person on her back on the ground, and lay a strong pole firmly in the ground between her knees, and tie bandages around, so that he does not hurt the sick person;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then place the minister's knee, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to 1.a. tie, so that he is tied to the column of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and the pole is placed close between the knees of the sick person in order to hold the sick person up while he is being lifted;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	and then put the mirror equal to the dislocation with his hands, and other ministers dye the healthy leg at the deso, and the dislocation will come back completely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is finished, so that the plaster is applied and dried, and the form is given, and the foot is tied to the leg, and the tendons which are behind the ankle are guarded so that the bonds are not too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then leave it.ii. days or iij., and if the form is good, then leave it; then remove it on the third day or fourth, and do not let the sick person walk for iiij. days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that term is up, it is still not safe that he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come up, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it is gently extended without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the hip joint or in the ankle, so it is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a flat surface or on a table and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot in this form until he regains his position.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is nothing open, then place the sole of the foot on a table to .ij. shoulders, then draw out the form, and leave it .iij. days, then let go; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be too proud:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing balm, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, so I reset the limb to its place now, so that the balmy balm comes;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing balm to the wound, as it should be, with dried herbs;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the joints are dislocated, then do as we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you dear according to your creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here is the translation:
