O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, most dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine as a whole, and I have finished it by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work of the hands, that is to say, "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is well-treated in our region and is strange to all, it is a perilous science and worthy, and there is no delay from the forces except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, error and vanity have come, and the intentions are closed and the science is separated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I think that I will bring it back to life together with the order of this healer according to the way of exposure and statement and abbreviation; and will come together with the shapes of the tools of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the statement and preparation of it, just as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who deals with it must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the shape and connection of bones and nerves and veins and the number of organs, and the movement and flowing together and rest of joints, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because, as Hippocrates says, nothing is with nothing and everything is with everything; and especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you in the introit of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things before spoken of, let him guard himself lest he fall into error and harm men; so that I have often wanted many of those who meddle in this science and who abandon themselves to science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scrofula or throat of a woman, and cut the arteries in the throat; so that so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another foolish man who fought with an axe against a man of age, and the axe was big; so he took a piece of the bladder with him, and he died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen him called to draw out a lance, and I saw the disposition of the sick person and the greatness of the lance; and if he had drawn it out, he would certainly have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And here is the first sentence of the text:
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	And here is the translation of the first sentence:
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, all the ways in which this corruption occurs are confirmed by injury to the member, and it cannot be healed; and this corruption does not cease to spread through the member until the members are completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And here is the first sentence of the text:
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For charnel, when it is purulent with melancholy humor, it should only be touched by iron if it is in the right place where one can completely remove what is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, a skilled craftsman should know that the work of hands is divided into 2.1 divisions: namely, where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For thus you should guard yourself, so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better path so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and reject those weapons from whom you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galiens says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of bad illnesses, lest you be called a fool."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to .ii. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the order of the body parts; as well as shapes of instruments, tools for cauterization, and everything else necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about tailoring and sewing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; as well as the ordering and shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is ordered of the surgeon to measure only as much flesh, and of the form of the instrument.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, we remember the work; it is necessary for me to give the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and its responses are hidden. Many wise men have spoken about this, and they agree with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is an aid to all complexions in which there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot and dry matter, and cold and dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some thought it good and said that cautery is great help; and others said the opposite: that cautery is of no account to disease which comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by hot disease through heat, nor through dryness; and he who said that cautery does great help to hot and dry disease which comes in courses to men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found none by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, do not interfere with it but those who have tried it and know by long use the fire cautery, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the effects and the space of ten; we have no fear of other complexions, indeed, except for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all things agree together and accord with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery agrees together and is of greater benefit than medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not forward but to the limb which is cooked, and does no harm to another limb by name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning remedies come from one member to another by way of withdrawal, and bring sickness of great cure to the member; and perhaps they cause the disease.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have given to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I beg you to excuse me for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I should disclose the secret of fire which is answered elsewhere, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher states in proving; and so receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at what times, and they were to be prayed for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, for because the harmful consequences that arise from aid by cauterization; and most importantly, the cauterization is for necessary pains that cannot be waited for the time that greater harm does not come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And I do not think ever, son, as they do so; for with the illness that is healed by cauterization does not have a return; and it serves thus; but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is nothing more than medicine that changes the appearance, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the illness will not come according to the appearance of the disease and its place and virtue; and are assembled in it the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not administered cauterization at the place where there is little excess and moisture, so as cauterization for the pain, and the similar things, and the pain does not return; but it does come little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand because the cauterizes are called the derriers of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that the cauterizes are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and the cauterizes are the derriers of medicine for whatever reason when we administer ways to heal in no disease and they are not worth it, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth something.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, know well that the cauterizes are the derriers of medicine, not at all according to the intention of the foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient men said that the cauterizes made of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, and they only stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance; they also said that the heat of a cauterize does not cause inflammation, but this is not true, for I have proven it, and I have found that in some people it does; and the cauterizes of gold are more beneficial than those made of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And anyway, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you are not burned when it is held to your skin, and it soon cools down; and if it is heated too much, it will turn black on the fire, and so there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use our fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For I have ordered this chapter about the lochia until it is finished, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is good for the brain, and in it I have two uses: one is because of a disease called "soda," and the other is because of various humors that descend from the head to the hair, and for many dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases caused by cold, such as paralysis and soda and apoplexie and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the disease should be expelled by a soluable medicine, speaking about the third day, according to what the virtues and the freshness and the habit of the patient can bear; and then do the same with the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the cross between your hands, and put his hands on your chest; after that, place the root of your thumb on the root of his index finger; and as soon as it comes to you, if it bleeds, heat the cautery that is called 'oliver', from which this form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the ink sign, and do it descending and extracting your hand little by little in turning back; then release your hand completely, and reward the leech where you see the bone 1 small; and if you don't see it, then restart the cautery as soon as you see the bone as I told you; after that, take 1 little bit of leech, and put it in wet cotton, and put it on the ink, and let it stay for 3 days; after that, put it on wet wool; and leave it until it is heated; then cure the wound with an ointment called 'tetrarch', until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And say the ancient one that the longer the wound stays open, the more it expels; and for this reason if you help it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one must leave the cauterization so much that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other said that one must leave the cauterization so much higher up, and pierce it so hard that women put in their breasts to let the humors go out; and one must leave the wound open a long time; after which one must cure and sew.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except where there is doubt and fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it alone; because the head, by nature, is weakened by continuous solutions, as we witness in other members; and even more so when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization seems to me to be safer and less harsh for me, and I use that one where possible to assemble salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all parts of the head come chronic pains, and endure long, then must use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head purging, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery that we have above said, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize it quickly as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the fire cautery on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said above, and make the fire cautery at the place which is called "vasselz"; and that is the place where one sets the leech; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it comes that the cauterizations of the horns are more delicate than those by which one cauterizes the soft part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to one side of the head and spreads up to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed with medicinal poisons, and other cures are made as I said in the division of diseases, and nothing helps: then make the cauterization according to these two ways, that is to say, with medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When the medicine for acute pain is made from an almond, and the peel and core are removed and boiled in water for two chaps, and then the water is poured over the skin; and when it has dried, put cotton in it until it is soft.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the medicine has cured, until it is well; and if you wish, do as much of the treatment with burning medicines that I have written or treated with fire.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Et est apelez "clos" por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d'un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu doloureux, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l'espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n'arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And let it be called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has .i. poc of corbeure, and in the middle to a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little gently, until the half of the keur's flesh is burned; and let go your hand that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and runs an abundance of blood.
de emigraine	For the headache:
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	For the headache:When you treat a headache as we have said above in the divisions of illnesses, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization in front does not hurt at all, then it is right that you heat the fire which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus write on the painful place a line half as long as the finger, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cover the artery and come no closer; and guard against the jaw that moves when you yawn, and let there be no rustling or twitching of the muscles except by accident, and guard against the pain of the blood vessels when they are covered, which is a great fear and more to him who does not know it, and who is a scholar and has tried it; and leave the work in half a line.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as well, as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals. And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said or the extract of blood vessels with the cautery which has 1/4th of a tool; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied the solutions and other cures which we have said in the chapter on the division of the head, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which the form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having heated the tip of this cautery, which is called "poins", of which the form is:
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	torture that must be cured by fire is only effective for those that move from pus, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use fire on similar things that come from scabs and lice.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves from pus, scabs, and lice in the throat and gargling, and it is worth, then you should make three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further back on the temple, and the third at the meeting of the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part, and let it burn half of the time; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the scalpel be a little thicker; after curing the area as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et i. emmi le chief, et i. ou leu qui est apelez "vasselz" si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l'estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.
de litargie	As for the treatment of litargy,
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For the treatment of litargy,
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, it is good; and if not, he makes 1.iii. cauterises removing the hair from the head down to the neck, and there is space between each cauterise of 1.ii. two big ones; and treat as before, and if it stings, and the patient suffers, then make 1. cauterise in the middle; and if necessary, 1.iii. others on the 2.ii. cornes, and treat him until he is well; and let the cauterises which are called "olive", be as before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	of the cold
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the fire, he makes gargling and chewing with bones of meat; after that he places the head in the middle, and he does .i. cautery according to what we have said before, and .i. cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, he does cauteries as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the neck, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive according to the way I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, he does a subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excesses or corrupt moisture and thick pus, then he does partial cauterization as we have said to him who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, there is a decline in excesses toward melancholy, and the patient's neck is moist, then he does a drinking thing so that the brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see fit to cauterize him by making several points all around the cautery. This way of cauterizing moistens the skull evenly; and then put cotton soaked in butter and in grease of goose on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awoke comes first as eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient thing purifying the head, and the ward of all moisture, and he makes sweat or bath several times on hunger.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has given a command to raise his head, and has caused fire cautery to be made on his head, and has made .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples where it is dislocated from the jaw, all together, or in .i. where it is dislocated, it is in .i.; and cover all the cauterization with all the veins and arteries that are removed from the chin, let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood coming out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop him by doing what you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to stop the blood flowing in extraction of the arteries and in incising the cautery; and never make a cauterization or hurt behind the 2 bones of the neck.
dou cors des larmes	the two tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delege the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outwardly; and one can see that it is cold superfluities of phlegm, therefore he does the cautery that I said at the beginning of the jaw descending to the eyes: 1. cauterize the head, and 2. cauterizes on the 2 temples, and 3. cauterizes where he has hurt from the 2 bones; and if it is needed more, if the cauterizing bleeds well on the skin at all small cauterize.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears run down inside the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have done this medicine as we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then do three times a day three cups of drink for illness; after he raises his head, and makes a fire at the middle of the olive cauldron; and does three fires on the three nails, a little oil the hair; and take care of the vein that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the fire:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then the fire of this cauldron that is called "olive": from this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see so many cauterizes on the seven types of wounds as the scalpel is long; and do not let go of the hand except that the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair that points to the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has passed that the hair of the oils is converted to the parched, and grasps the oil, and it does on cauterizes according to 1.i ways: namely of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. Car en l’ovraige de cet chapitre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are long and even, then put the patient in your bed; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the fuel of mirth, and let it be the beginning of the sign by which the hairs are pricked; then put cotton wet with glue and muskroot made into an oil on the fire, and heat the cautery by which this form is made:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have signed little by little several times so that the scar is burned in place; and the sign of the work's health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then let your hand rest, and leave it thus .iij. days, then put cotton wet with butter as long as it is warm; after the wound has healed as much as it can.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And then when these come out, and the paper is softened then begin again the fire on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs have fallen, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural position, and is even, and does not prick the hair oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fiery cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the mirth leaf; then take of French soap and of hot water, of each one a ¼, and grind them well together; and do it promptly, so that if it doesn't cool down, then spread on the shape you have made like the mirth leaf, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the illness is in 1 oil only, then operate in 1, and also in both; and put cotton wet with glue and muskroot made into an oil on the fire; and heat the cautery by which this form is made: when the patient feels the medicine's burning, press 1 time and half and damp all times as the patient feels the medicine's burning, for he also feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have done this for a long time, take the medicine to your chest.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the mordication has passed, raise the arm and keep it raised as if it were lifted by a fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are even, and your nails are cut; and then put cotton wetted with oil over the wound for as long as the burn itches, after which heal the wound that is called "diane" and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must take care of your wound with great care so that it does not break out with the medicine on the hair. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair grows in oil, then start the medicine again on the spot that is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before; after healing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the powder made from mirabelle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hair of men is different in length and thickness, and according to what you are constrained; and do not give the right answer to anyone whose study of this craft it is.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is appropriate that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his/her head in your lap; and hold the hair at the base with a damp cloth or juice of persimmon on oil; then heat the cautery which is sharp: and hold it to the head like a feather, together so that the tip is near the scalp; if you see, so point it from one side to the other, and if you don't see, so hold it like a tent; but however, that which is held over the head will move for your benefit.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, so overture it, and treat the bowels; after put a sharp cautery on it, and hold your hand over the cautery with oil, that your hand does not go mad; and put the cautery in oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be good. If not, begin cauterizing again, and otherwise as you need, and leave it .iii. days; after i put on cotton wet in oil, and cure for the healing of the wound dry as long as it is healthy, and if .xl. days pass that it is healthy, then put on medicine corrosive to water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what came out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And I have a method of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancient ones spoke of. Understand a fistula, and pierce the place; after put in the piercing 1. a thin metal of which this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I make it in the quantity of 1.Z. of molten; and hold your hand or camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the melted drop does not run to its oil; and it is good that you put on cotton wet in alcohol or wine: the drop then strikes the place of the fistula, and heals with a maravillous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer a piercing blow to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the nose according to what came out in his chapter.
des crevaices en levres	of the sores on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouth times have creases on the lips that are called "hair", and most often on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these sores as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it directly into the sores until it burns; after treating with ointment until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When abscess comes to the root of the throat or to the palate or to the roots of the teeth, after having been rotten and swollen and has become a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, it does no good: then you should have 1.i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having sewed up or pierced the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron comes into the source of the water, and behind it; and do so once or twice., after having cured as we have said in the cures, as long as it is healthy; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you should uncover the site and remove the corrumpted bone according to what you will find in his chapister.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after heating the cautery so that its form will come out as described hereafter, then put a ring on the tooth; and insert the cautery quickly into the tooth root, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the tooth root; then remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your wish; after filling the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keeping it for an hour and washing it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And so the following is the translation of that text:
de la dolor des dens	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	For when the pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold in the mouth, and the remedies of medicine are useless, then it is necessary to cauterize according to the following four ways: and cauterizing with butter and cauterizing with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	And the following is the translation of that text:
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery all together if it is such that you squeeze a tooth of iron or of gold, and make it gross so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; then heat the cauterizer, from which the shape will come afterwards, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterize cools; do this often, for the pain will be great that very day or the next. And it is convenient that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of that cautery, and then suck hard; and here is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterizer from the tooth of your choice, and according to what you have power; and here is the shape of the tooth:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when the scrofula is of cold and wet sweat, and does not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizer that comes after this, and has 1.3 openings for the fumes to come out at the cautery of the other side; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or 1.3 times is done, whatever the size of the abscess is, and leave it ensi 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil in butter on it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with ointments and Bandages until it is well.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture conquers the channels in which they flow, and even more so when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first voided by medicinal solvents; then do cauterization at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come all the way to the throat, and dare not cur it, but just a little. Then I will do another cautery at the joint of the neck with the chief of the spine, and let these cauteries be called "clavicles" from which we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said above until it is healthy.
de la toust	for the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the lungs are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills but is an old illness, then he should do iij. cauterices in the forelegs on the lungs; and another cautery emmi the pis between iij. mameles; and let these cauteries be called "clavicles" according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, do cauterization by piercing all the cauterization that is called "poins" from which the form is as described in the disease of the ears; and let these points up to .iii. or until the ear. After cure the place according to what is before said, and let the cauterizations be made to iij. rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you are doing it.ii. at home.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, speak kindly to the patient about his back and ribs; then take hold of the knuckle with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery for .iij. nails; here is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize him as long as he pierces up to the rib, and comes together with the figure of cautery 2.3 cauterizes; and for this one is made a cauterization with the cautery which has 1.3 nerves, because the figure of cauterization are placed cauterizes; and are the nerved according to the subtility of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery which has 1.3 nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never put on this 1.6 nerve because there are 8 cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After you have put on the cautery, grind with it; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well fixed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated on top, pour liquid over it; then make cauterize on the thick of the cautery clavile, or out of cauterizes in striking. For the jointure is closed, and is bone the moisture and is healed the maladies.
dou cautere de pleuresin	To treat a cough
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	To treat a cough, they used to say to make a tincture of aristo root, and in this way: take an aristo root that is long, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your two fingers; then soak it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize.i. cauterize between the chest and the neck, andii. small cauterizations a little down on the part that is under the beard; andii. small cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting backwards a little; and i. cauterize the breast, and i. another one on the stomach, andi. between the two shoulders, and ii. more between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand tightly, but open it widely as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And no ancient one said that any man uses a fire cautery resembling a razor, and scrapes and places it between the ribs, until it comes to the aposteme; and he jumps at the pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	Here is the translation of the text:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	"From these three methods, you should do all three types of cauterization, according to the length and shape of the mouse's cauterization, as we have described above. Do not rush with your hand over all the cauterization, and let the patient rest on his back;"
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	"And another way of cauterizing is to heat the cautery with two nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery where the cut of the disease begins on the left side, and raise it according to the length of the body, and the cauterization is according to the width of the body."
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	"After the two nails are heated, leave them red-hot until the other side is perceived, and then quickly apply the cautery, and thus you will have three. After the cure, when it has been heated for a long time, and this is enough to complete the other cure that we mentioned above."
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	from dropsy
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cauterization alone for a long time, do not continue with the cure for the disease after the cauterization; and the healing would hasten, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key that we have in front to describe it; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described ahead.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the joints are swollen in a person with gout, and they are yellow in color, then you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and gently remove your hand from the cautery without turning it off. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow liquid burst forth, and instead perform the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making the cautery on .ij. legs in each leg at the tip of the fingernail; and let the cautery be long, one from the ankle in front and the other behind, while keeping the leg still; and leave the cauterization for a long time without washing it off, lest the yellow liquid come out; then cure the others as we have said.
de la menoison	from the foot
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach are lost, and cannot be cured by any means; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, then do I.i. a great cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken here before or cautery of the stomach, with cautery circulated; and I.iiij. cauteries inside the navel gently to all I.i. cautery clavicle, and II.ij. cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then do I.i. cautery on the wrist, and I.i. cautery on each finger, and II.ij. small cauteries on the stomach, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrumptous humors, and are cured if as we have said in divisions, and does not benefit, then do I.iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all defuers almecdate poc and poc in triangulating, and I.i. cautery of the buttocks. ij. dois;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think his stomach is cool, and the meat doesn't cook, and you see the face swell, then on i . f . a great cautery over the stomach, as it has been said before, and another over the liver, and i . another over the mice to all the cauterization nailed; and let the cautery overt long time. After cure the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnality which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope to the thul, if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on the thul; and leave so much your hand that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, of which it is without doubt; do this once or two times, and if there is a lot of thul, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cures of profitable oignons until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a bad wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear a wound or incision, we will tell you in due course, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there comes a fistula and it is increased and pours putrid moisture, if you provide a tentative remedy of all subtlety, and remember that you know how much it is effective. After heating the cautery which seems sharp, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that the attempt has entered, and restart the cautery as long as those corrupt and corrupted parts are burned, once or twice, according to the quantity of the required; and keep away from the nerves that are in them, and do not do this but in a charnel-house, and think that it is not persistent; after curing the part until it is sound, and if the parts are dried up, you will know that the part is completely cured; and if the parts have not been dried up, you will know that the part has been three times burned, and that the bone at the root is corrupt; and so as one of these which we will tell you in due course.
de la maladie des reins	from the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes with fierce wind, and does not take a woman's form, then you must give a cautery to the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cautery which we have just mentioned; and if we give the cautery in the middle, there will be 2 cauterizations in line, and it will be more useful help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder, where the hairs grow on the penis, and .i. to the right and .i. to the left, and each cautery as long as a finger; and make a cautery behind the back, where you need it; and let the cauteries be nailed according to the shape described above.
de la marris	of the womb
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, so that it does not allow for conception, and the flowers are腐したand their termsdelayed; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore it is necessary to make 11 cauteresthroughout the womb, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and 11 cauteresthoughout the back; and let the cauteries be nailed, as we have said.
de la hainche	from the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be soft, so that you should cauterize the patient on the hip box at i.i. a circular cautery, and sign in front of the joint inside the circle as it turns, so that the box is within the circle; and if so, cauterize like those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make i.i.i. large olive cauterizations, and let the cauterization be complete as all the others; and heal it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	from the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with pills made from bad bile, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery, and the manner of the cautery is according to .iij. ways: namely together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to much ways, of which one is this: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. cauteries triangular according to this form, and make it deep and wide, and between each cautery there is the thickness of a thumb, and it is olive; never does one make cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for by doing so one has .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip: but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the joint be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the manner that is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach until the thigh or leg: and if it comes only to the thigh and leg, you do  .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds, and 1. cautery above the ankle 2. three, at the left part a little; and let the cauterizes be scissor-like, and let the thickness of the joint burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the instep, you do the cautery where he feels the pain  .iij. points or  .iiij. at the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if your craft is to treat this, do it more; and if the pain is felt in the groin toward the thigh, make a cautery with a knife-like or circular scalpel, and give yourself good care for all your cauterizations so that you do not let go of them even a little bit while burning the hair and large arteries, and causing greater harm and contraction to the sick person.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have made cauterization on the foot of the leg and left it so that the whole leg was raised, and the toes too, and it was pierced and corrupted all the toes. After a solution of the belly from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in .ij. parts together, make cauterization in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And the wise said in the cauterization of the ankle, from which it is this way, make a piece of iron and be at the top also thick as one finger of a hand or one less, and be between the intertraches and also on the one intertraches jusc' to the other d'espace the quantity of a nut of piece; and let the intertraches be above of .ij. parts, and also like noez, and there are .i. pieces of good iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and gnat, and then put it on the box of the sick ankle, and turn it on the right side of the chest; and make cauterization one time 1 cauterization and leave 1ij jors; and then make plaster with grease, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of ointment until it is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of his burning, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery, which he can bear, and where he afflicts himself.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by bending over, or from impact, or from excessive evaporation, or by the appearance of expanding cold matter; no remedy is suited to these except that which is due to the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that the patient be voided of foul pills or other things; let him take a suppuration on his back, where the pain is, three lines apart, and in each line let there be as many caustics as the patient can bear; and make the cautery according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, take 2 or 3 caustic
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Maitre doctor, mays de peine pour ces jeunes enfants qui naissent avec une tete plate et qui ne peuvent pas se tenir debout sans aide; nous voyons des marques de leur peine dans leur dos, et c'est pourquoi ils ont l'air maladroit quand ils marchent.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	Master doctor, may God be with you as you treat these young children who are born with a flat head and cannot stand without support; we see the signs of their suffering in their backs, and that is why they look awkward when they walk. If you see him, treat him according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire cautery is applied evenly to each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with a burning cautery.ij or iij lines apart, and let the points be close together. After treating it as we have described, guard against applying cautery to the marrow where there is nerve tissue.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the people call "podagre" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery olive according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When it is necessary to hold on the face of the foot, then do a fire cautery on all the cauterization that is claimed "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then do a cautery on each knee with .iiij. cauterizations or all the olive cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firm except when the fire of the wound is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cauterization that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then do it around the wrist 1.ij. lines; and if there remains no pain in the two, then do it on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the sleeves or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government with the patient and pour medicines. For if you make good government and you purge phlegm, then you will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the cut of the surgeon
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the boils descend to the coions and it is recently, so that when you see him healed, he does not harm him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; then let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to wash his hair as long as the boils are repaired, and bring them to your hands, and sign on one side of the rupture on the bone with a knuckle, and all a sign that is like half of a circle above the heart; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is white and wet with sweat. Then bring the boils to their place; and the minister wash his hand so that he does not turn back; and work well the legs of the patient, and put one .i. cussin and one .i. sergeant on the legs, and one .i. other on his pis who wash his hands; then put the cautery on the mark with all your hand, and hold it tight and hold it as long as you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, then start again another time until you touch it; and be careful that the boil does not escape when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great according to their measure; then, after 3 days cure him with oil until his scorching is done; then cure him with other remedies until he is well, and lie down the patient for 10 days on his back until his wound is well-healed; and it is necessary that his nurses be satisfied for a long time, so that the boil does not escape when he goes to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him bring him a well-made bandage and put it on for .xl. other days; and have good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too high braising; and when he has done this teaching, let him completely heal. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make 1.3 cauterizations of the cauterization depending on its quantity, and let him burn the third of the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the old ones said that it must be cauterized at the cauterization at the 1.3 angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first sign is the top of the navel and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another from behind, and all the way down to the cauterization. But the first cauterizations are lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any member, or from a fall or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine does not help, then it is necessary that he be burned with fire which is called "poins", and be burned according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If it heals from the first burn, it is good; but if not, start again on that very same name, for this custom is that the fire must move to the member that is closest, so that you must make the burns until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of health
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the wound is everywhere sparse; and it loses manifestly, so that you cauterize it with these cauterizations which we have said at the head, namely: cauterization in the navel, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and five cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the skull, and another delicate one, and two cauterizations on the shoulders, and two on the arms, and two on the legs, and two on the hands, and two in the pits of the hands; and guard those nerves which are under the feet from being burned, that you do not burn them; and make no cauterization on the bone of the finger, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauterizations I make, the more help I give, and profit I get; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron weapons. After curing, provide a diet of flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is healthy.
de enfleure	And know that the more cauterizations I make, the more help I give, and profit I get; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy do, because the body is already corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron weapons. After curing, provide a diet of flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When the swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then he makes cauterization on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then the cure with onions until it is healed. And never do cauterization and hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is ostea the swelling; and yet there is no intermission if he does not know the members and outlets of moving nerves.
de albaras	Here are the line-by-line translations:
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awoken, and the medicine has no value, then he cauterizes with a small perfect cautery according to the quantity of the flesh of the cure until the blight is ostea and its color is changed; then he cures with flour of beans and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and wormwood and almond of each a part; and let them be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and spread at the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the chancre begins to appear, and you have seen it, if the cauterization is made with the cauldron that seems 1.i. a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And indeed the sages say that one should also make cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and indeed I do not think this is good, for I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to do this; and rather, it is better that it be cauterized around, with the cauldron called "circles", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When anyone has a disease that is called  "adubelati", and it delays death or because of the surplus of blood that it makes or because of the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the time; and you see him hurry to die: then cauterize him inside with small cauterizations by pricking; then let it be. For it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce it completely through the fire cautery, heat the cautery so that this is its shape:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand between this disease which is called 'adubelati' as long as the cautery has pierced it, and be such cautery that the patient feels a coldness in some way that the course of the infection is prevented. After the cure until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron:
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease that is called 'corrodens', and is not other than a member mengeson, for it injures members as fire dries up wood. If you see this disease in the raw which can suffer cauterize with fire, then heat the clavicle cauterys small and large, according to what suits the place where the disease is; after cauterize all around until you make the corruption completely go away, and nothing remains of it, that whatever is corrupted is Osteit. And then let it be .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the cure with ointments that generate char.  And if you see after .iij. days that char does not heal, if you start again to cauterize what is delayed corrupted. And this mengeson is never cured with medicine that generates char instead of cauterize fire; but nevertheless cauterize fire is more helpful, and I have already said the cure of medicine that generates char in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	the radishes that come out of the ground
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	the radishes that come out of the ground can sometimes cause a disease called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, hairy thing that bleeds the ground. And the remedies for this disease are as follows: namely, fire cautery, and water cautery. Water cautery is done in this way: first make an incision with a sharp tool like a knife, and so on, in order to prepare a cauterizing instrument; then heat it well with fire, and make it so that it can be inserted into the clove from all sides, and that there are thin margins; after that put it directly onto the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the base; and leave it in this way for 3 days, until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of wild mustard seeds crushed into powder, and leave the poultice on all night, and remove the nail, and will be pulled out from its roots. Then cure the wound by washing it with water as long as it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	and if they convert by default the body, and many times come out of it as hands and feet, then you must bring fire cautery; and there is a similar way: take a piece of iron or steel, or a knife blade, and put it on the nail and the verrus; and put the piece on it so that it turns red all around, then pour hot water on it, and firmly hold your hand, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water's path deeper up to the root; and let the disease feel a little of the hot water's bitterness for an hour; then leave it, and it will be pulled out from all its roots. Do this with each one until you have healed all those that are in the body, and then cure the wounds by washing them with water as long as they are healed.
li cure dou trembler	and cure the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver from cold or fever or another, if it is necessary that you do this .iiij. cauterys or .iv. on the spine of the back, 1. a cautery between each spine; and 1. a cautery at the feet, and 1. to the stomach with olive cautery; will leave them shaking, and will hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No one should notice any outward signs of corruption in the body or the appearance of blisters that come from large corrupted substances. If it is necessary to make a cautery on each head of a blister at the beginning, when it appears: a fine fire-tipped cautery made from mugwort, or from a root of aristea, or with a lens-shaped cautery. Nor should these be made at the very beginning when they first appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow encrustations before they are broken; but it is necessary that they be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery has been cut or torn, or has become blocked with a clot, if it needs to be tied off: tie it off with one knot or two knots, or three knots; and if it needs to be tied off with a ligature, use a wide bandage or a narrow bandage.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great disturbances of blood from the artery that is torn in the wound that comes to the skin, or incising an abscess, or cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Many times there are great disturbances of blood from the artery that is torn in the wound that comes to the skin, or incising an abscess, or cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to smell. If one arrives at any of these, then quickly put your little index finger on the vein wound, and strain it so much that the blood is quietened from your little finger, and neither drop of blood comes out anymore; then take fire-olives, big or small, as many as the wound and its place require, considering that the artery is stopped, and put the fire-olive on this vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	If he jumps when you lift your finger off the vein, and the fire-olive is extinguished, then quickly take another fire-olive from those that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make this one after another as long as the blood is stopped; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short from the blood vessel, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways we have said: or by cauterizing, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly winding a thread around it, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop blood; and bind and strain firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a tight bandage of fire or burning things on, or other similar things, unless he gains from it, he does not do well.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this comes to no one and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and over the vein; and not move it often, but keep it wet with cold water often until the blood is frozen and thick and firm; and do an incision in front of this one for whom it is necessary to cauterize and use medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all sickness in which fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the tools, forms, and methods of cauterization are concerned; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning, for by this middle path will those who are sick be cured more lightly than those who seek it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, o man, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauterizations, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to take any foolishness into account. Because many ways of people come into treatment. If they come from those who, because of their disease, die easily due to the madness that they suffer from its severity and its cruelty; and of these one must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these ones who give you their advice, and say: "Wait, I am about to die"; and the disease is cruel. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great confidence in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but carefully from those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken it and lost it; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and this one will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	"Or I have ordered this ointment in verses, according to what is before you, that ointment of the cautery, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find it more easily than that for which you need it."
dou chief plein d’aigue	the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	"I know that this disease often comes to children from the mother while she is pregnant; and when the child babbles, it pulls too hard at the head of the child; and for no reason I know why this happens."
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die young; and for this reason it seems to me that I should rather let the treatment alone.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose shoulders were wet, and the head fell every day until it could no longer be supported; and so much moisture accumulated that he died, and this moisture was so concentrated between the shoulder blade and the spine that you would need to split open the head with a wide slash; and go as far apart as I can:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess larger, then make two slashes in the form of a cross according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture is between the bones and the signs you see are that the cheeks are overtired on each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not close again: then you should make three slashes according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision remove all moisture. After that, remove the drape and powder, and put on wine and oil, and leave it so for five days; then loosen it, and cure the wound with tendrines and oilmments, and let the head be drawn out evenly, and give to the patient dried meat of little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incising is that you observe where the apex of the abscess is, and its connection to the vein; for it is never before, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut there where the abscess opens, and its draining into the vein, and do so according to your power; and be careful not to block the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient may die of blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "cataract" or "peale", and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not benefit, then the last cure is to cauterize with what they cover the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So then, when you have covered the eyes, let the patient turn his head; after he rubs the place with an arid cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth; then look where the vein enters, and the two are next to the ears, and they are joined together; then sign the two with a sharp knife on both sides. As much as the saw cuts to the bone, and this is done by turning the head wide.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pull out the knife and cover the artery on top, cutting it as two sides with a saw.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, so that the blood does not stop flowing continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Et s'il le poignent à lor naissance, se li estraint les yeux qu'il ne se muevent tant qu'il naissent.
de emigrainne	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes fixed so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient emaciation comes, and catarrh obtained, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things, and it is medicined by ways of medical treatments and all that does not benefit him, we draw out the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Et li maniere de l’extraction d’elles si est que li patient feise ruer les poils de ses temples, et entende à l’artère qui apert en la temple, car elle apertura bien par son battement, et est poc repue fuers que en certains homes qui sont trop froids; et s’elle est repue, si extrange son col du patient d’aucuns drapeaux, puis frotte le lieu d’aucun aspre drape, et arrose le lieu d’aigue chaude tant que l’artère aparaisse manifestement; puis pren le spatule de coi ci est la forme:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	And the method for extracting them is that the patient rubs the hairs of his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little filled except in some men who are too cold; and if it is filled, then extrude the patient’s neck from some cloths, then rub the place with no rough drape, and pour hot water on the place until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula where this is the form: then peel the skin lightly as far as you come to the artery, then twist it upwards like pincers, and sever it well from the webs that are of each part; and if the artery is not severed, then does not save all but half in all. For if it is not severed, then does not save all but half in all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And twist the blood of 5/7 parts as far as 3/4; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in 2 threads of a strong silk thread, that rot can not come before the burning of the wound, and come away from blood; then cut off the excess that is between the 2 lines at that moment itself, and then, if you see, then cauterize with fire cautery as far as the bone as long as the joints are cut; and this is the work of the knife, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cautery is an aid to end moisture: for this is a more powerful aid than moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For when extracting arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with well-made cotton wadding; and when they are removed, if you use dry medicines that make blood flow, and tents, until they are healed; and unless you cover the artery with a cup of cauterization, or you employ the leach of vitriol and extract it by hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you have none of these, place your finger on the place until the blood stops, and raise the place with cold water until the blood continues to flow, and is extracted as necessary; and that which is bleeding and lighter in extraction from the artery is that you cauterize the edge of this fire trenchant by half, but let the trenching be well made so that it lasts longer on the heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, its heat does not last long.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two tools a space of an inch, and then when you have signed with the two edges, and you measure with the hot iron until it comes to the bone, and cap the edge in two edges; and let them be separated between the two joints because it is not bound by this fire cauterization from anything in all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come out from the veins that are on the forehead at the base of the head, and the medicine does not benefit them, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel a coldness when moving as if it were frostbitten; and since they are held tight and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls off, and the eyebrows get red, and scarred by the heat of the tears, then this cure is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And it was called the 'old cure' and that is what you do to the sick person whose hair falls out at the base of the forehead, then make .iii. incisions along the length of the forehead evenly; and one of the incisions should be like .ii. two all the way down to the nose, and the others .ii. as far up as the eyebrows, and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ii. mandibles, and each wound should have .iii. dosages at the joins.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and put on a sponge and wet it with drops of water to wipe away the blood, then pour the spitamail from the two parts where this is done:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you cut into the first slit the instrument that is called a 'charlatan', and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side is soft, not sharpened, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And set the blade of the instrument which is called a 'charlatan' towards the back at the end, and the blade towards the bone, and cut it as far as you can into the middle slits. Then do the same on the other side from the middle slit up to the other end; and then remove the bone evenly, and express the blood; then put a piece of old linen in each slit, and put wet drapes of wine and oil and honey there, and keep so that the pustules do not come out; and on the third day unbind him, and wash him thoroughly with cold water, and then apply the basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, as long as he is well.
dou reume des eulz	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is no catarrh by custom, and you see the hairs tens and small, and blinding the sight, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where it chief in pain ague, and the patient sneezes; then know from these accidents that those things and that catarrh do not come but from many veins, and this medicine which is, if so be.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And that you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large wound at the front, and another wide one. i. poc. And begin from the wound of the left temple to the right temple, and cut down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when he coughs; and when the bone is exposed, if you suck all the blood with a sponge, then wash between the .ij. lips of the wound and put cotton there, and wrap it in wet sheets soaked in wine and oil, and do not heat an abscess; when it has been opened, if you see that characters begin to be born, then cure them with things that dry up, which cause chaps.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take  .ij. parts of flower of wheat, and 2/3 parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it in these wounds to cause chaps everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stooping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All who have ears are of the  .iiij. things: or grain, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing as iron; or seed, as beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and quickly and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it chiles in the ear stone or other manner of thing that does not fit to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, so distil a little violet oil or oil of sesame, then bring extraction; and what is done is to stutter with condiscion, and the nostril stop when the stuttering comes, and puts entor the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and the ear goes up. Many times comes force by this cure; and if it does not come force, so bring extraction with small pins, whereby this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pins, it is good; if this does not happen, so bring extraction with small sharp double-edged tool; and if it does not jump out by this, so take a piece of raindrop and pour the head of the raindrop or passageway of the ear very hard, and stop what is inside with soft wax so that it cannot come in with the raindrop; then treat it as described, for many times comes force like this which we have said; and if it does not come force in any way, so take glut from where in take the oisiaus, and put a piece of cotton in; then press the glut on the stone or whatever it is, and treat it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not jump out with the above methods, so split the ear like this that the hot apothema comes, and spasms; and the way of the split should be that you make the first doctor of the head pain, and extract blood according to its measure of virtue, then put the head of the pain between your hands and turn the ear up, and split a little cut in the root of the ear at the fat or depending leech; and let the cut be like the moon, as long as you come to the stone, then the split according to your strength, and suck it carefully in your mouth; and the cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is seed grain that is infected and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot be extracted, 2. i. e., the sputum is thick and thin according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision on that grain. But do not do this when you think the grain is moist because of the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with a thin needle and tweezers, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	So that the patient uses sneezing as a first condition, and widens the ear with old cotton. And it should be gilled on that ear mid-way where the fluid is; if it is not, it is good. If it is, then take many small pieces according to the length of your finger from one side to the other, and warm them a little at the fire; and put one or another of them into his ear, and saw with one on its side, and with another on the other side; and do not cease to make a piece of stone into another as long as the fluid is all gone, and so it is; and if you see, take 1. i., e., a junc, and bottle one of the ears, and the other chief takes fire until half the junc is burned; then remake the other with others until the fluid is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small core, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large core that one can feel, administer extraction with needles; and this is the lightest thing to extract that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if the patient does not benefit from the treatment as described in the chapter on division and treatment of distillations, look at the ear in the sunlight; if there are no worms, grasp the base gently, and if there are none, consider the shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	Is it narrow at the top and wide at the bottom. Squeeze the tip of the ear gently according to the amount of pain experienced by the patient; then suck out the contents form the entire canal; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not want to come out, break them with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise up as we have described, administer distillations that the old ones tried when extracting worms from the ear, and you will find them where we described the treatment for distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all these instruments, consider this to be the shape as you see it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make the ear canal narrow at the bottom and wide at the top; provide a vessel for distilling; and for pressing the distillation out, use a well-made silver instrument; if you have a razor, wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice into it, and add whatever medicines you have to the canal; and let the ear be the shape of an instrument; then dip the cotton into the razor and press it against the ear, with your hand pressing it gently until the oil is distilled or evaporated from the ear; then smell the patient's ear, and the distillation should be warm on the fire as when you distill in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the treatment of earache:
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with any ear perforations; and this same thing happens to adults due to the impact of a wound or a horse's hoof inside the ear, and such impacts never completely enter the ear unless one can't see them; nor does it ever happen that there is just a little hole, and then he sees well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So if it completely enters unless one can't see it, it is a grave treatment in many conditions, and when this happens that you put the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has completed all this scum of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so it will be useful and sharpen in front and behind all flatly, so that it does not wound the ear; if the operation is a horse's hoof or a horn in the ear, if it holds the fine pinches, and the cover lightly, until this horse's hoof is completely bony.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is completely in the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly, then put it on the horn of the ear. If you feel the operation that the sick one feels as if it were an itch at the hearing, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not aggravate the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten it with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make no fire for as long as the wound is still sore, or take a tent and soak it in rosewater, and powder with vitriolic broth; and if you see the ear escape, so be it that you pull out the tent and move another tent wet with cerotic wax, which has been made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has dried up; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes from the swelling, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that relieve the pain of the swelling which are or distillers.
de la char des papieres	of the dust of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take the ash of the papers when they are moist and dry, so be it that you extend them with pliers and tweezers, and dip it in vitriolic broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if not cut short, if the fire cautery of the lenticular cautery is slow, and the cautery maker after incising grows still; and many times return, because nothing stays at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, if those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the greasiness
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come out in sheets of paper some things that seem greasiness in its form and in its hardness, and for this is called "grandine", and is an assembly of moisture thick on the paper above and below; the ovraiges are such: take care if the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; cut the large, then the scorching of each part lightly, then take it at the pincers, and the cap. So you do not can cap without piercing a little the paper, if not grieve nothing to the patient; and if the split is big, if make an assembly with a stitch, and cure as long as she is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the oilmens restorer her soon and harm her.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends to the inside of the ear towards the upper part, inverses the paper, and are the grandine at a pair of pincers, and cap and press from one side and from the other; and if the paper is separated by the incision, this does not grieve anything; and when the grandine is capped, let the oil of salty water, and cure the place where it has been hurt until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinch is a fat that is made in webs of paper above, and this happens more to children of no people, and it grieves them much in their eyes, and they come with morning catarrh, and cannot see the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes; and for this they lie on their faces from then on, and sleep, and are their paper above their wet sillies that swell and change in appearance from the exinch which opens in the oil. And when you press down the place between your two fingers and feel the exinch between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of this oiled cloth so is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a sheet of linen, and make a tent according to the quantity that contains exinch from each part, and then put it on him; and press with your fingers from one side and the other, so that the exinch is gathered into the circle; then cut in the middle with a wide blade, and not be any bigger than the wound at the vein's head; and then make the skin in all parts until you come to the exinch; and in several dispositions comes exinch from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then remove all of the oiled cloth between your fingers at the end, and turn your hand to the right and the left until it is spread out; and be careful that you do not stir in the cut, so that you do not come to all the spatumile except for the oil, so that you do not spoil it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exit does not open in the beginning of the cut, then make it a little lighter so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the drape with water and put it on its place, and extract the bonds from it.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who grind seel and put on it so that the moisture that is delayed is corrupted. Then let the doctor treat as long as he is healthy. And if it comes to the base of the arm, let the doctor treat with poultices soothing until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hair papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair papers come out, other than nature's, and are dried up, if they harm the hairs, and cause ways of diseases as tears do, and the softening of papers and albugine, so that it is a cause of the destruction of the hairs; and the doctor is according to 3.iij. ways: or by fire cautery together, or by medicine ague according to what it is in front, or chapister of cautery, and it is made or by incision and stitching or by caines, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the patient in your lap, and then return the paper of oil to your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; but if not, pour an needle into all i. thread above; and let the end of the hair be removed from these hairs, and let the thread run through all the skin, and return it to the shaver; then make a hole in the part of the hair, remove the hairs carefully, covering all the spatumile, from the great wound to the small; then pull out the thread, and place the paper over with a little cotton and cloth, and sign on the paper a figure of an ear, as the furrow of the myrtle, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a need that it should take a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make in all the spatumile on the ii. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great wound to the small; and let it be a split near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the oil into one of the ii. corners of the four, then scorch it entirely; then join the ii. lips with a stitch of a needle on all i. thread of fine wool, and wash the blood, and make air for the excess of the threads on the ii. sorcels on nothing sticky, if you see to do this; and if not, then have no care, then leave the stitch and the threads until iii. or iv. days; then cure the wound without a stitch with dry and constrictive things, because the paper relaxes at the sound of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is damp (as the old say), and it is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and that you sign the paper with a figure that is also as the furrow of the myrtle, as we have told, with iii. oncins divided according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then chop what rises at small heights evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	if you don't have the ability to hold the tweezers, and that thing is not even, then take an needle where there is .i. thread, and wrap it around the shape; and a different thread from the other one, and wrap it around the big wound, and the second one around the little one, and join them evenly between your fingers; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have cut, as we have told you, then sew together the 2 lips of the wound with sutures, and calm it down with cerate and similar ointments that soothe;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there is no chance that the hair on the paper turns white: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the suture, in this and that, is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for canes so is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the fent inside according to what I have said, and then make 2.i. nails by art, and 2.i. threads also fine as the paper and the largeness of the spatium is; and chop at the 2.i. ends of the 2.i. parts where you hold the threads; then join the one and the other finely on what rises from the paper with the oil, and strain the 2.i. nails of the 2.i. parts together; and leave it so for some days, and the skin that is stretched will be blackened and dried up and peel off.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the copestone has hardened, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sewed up, and if the paper has been removed, then they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	If it delays, if the cast has hardened, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sewn up, and if the paper has been removed, then they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two dogs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: The ovations are such that you press a very fine needle, and pour 1 line of very fine silk thread; then assemble the chief and tie them together finely, and be the length of the threads one palm of length; then order in the chase 1 other very fine thread of silk quickly, and tie the chiefs to it; then put the patient's chief onto you; and be the sun shining so that the ovations are inclined, for they are very fine and small, then pour the needle into all the chase at the root of the hair placed there, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair; then draw out the hair up to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the chase through all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes out of its hole above and you see it by the vision of the oil; then if you pull the chase and the thread, and pour in the oil and let it run 12 or 13 times, until the hair grows in its place and the hair comes up; and if the hair is small, then accompany 1 long hair of nature, and let it be carried with that which you leave, until it is stretched out and then let it down.
de la porriture de l’oil	About oil poisoning
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil poisoning, comes about in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. It also occurs suddenly due to a wound, scar, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method for treating this involves breaking that seal and separating the lips from it, and placing linen inside, and keeping it there until it heals; and you should not use anything that dries and restricts it. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than before; but use things that soften it, such as fenugreek; and brew water or ale or linseed oil, and melt castor oil, and wrap a linen cloth around it, and treat it with that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you take care that it does not become sealed in the same way as before; and the remedies we have mentioned are only used to treat this disease if it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the horse that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This is the translation:
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translated text:
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Here is the translation:
dou soudement de la papiere	I will not
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text:
de l’ungle de l’oil	I will not
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is so that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he opens the hairs; and take the paper to your hand, then curl the nail at the fingernails, and stretch it above; then take an needle, and I put 1.i. hair of a horse, or a cow, or a buffalo, and 1.i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the needle, and tie the nail to a thread and stretch it above, and peel off all the skin except the pulp and silk at the hair to the head, then cut off what remains in the root of the fingernail so that by incision does not come out the cors of tears customarily; and never stretch the nail to the oncene, and to the thread, as we have said; then peel all the spatumile up to here is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the spatumile does not touch the raw cloth and break it, and that the prune is not pricked; and after incision pour a little rope into the oil, and of the colier made of litargire, and leaves it until the other day; then he curates what it seems to him as long as he is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle in, and the ungle can not enter, this resemblance of nails of medicines is cured many times; and are born sicom I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, so operate the oil of the patient, and take the light spatumile poc according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And re-set the finger above very gently, and if you see that it thins out little by little and the rash increases, then distil from your mouth in the oil collar made of litarge and red dye and stop the oil until the other day; then start again with the other work according to this same operation until it is all healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if nothing is opposite to it in the oil, as an abscess, then the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is well, and then start again with the work as before, until it is well.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts greatly in the oil, so suspend it for a long time, and take a part of it, not all at once, until tears no longer come out; then distil into the red oil collar, which is made of litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the meat that grows on the cherry
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Here is the translation of the text:
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the hair has been removed, then pour into the oil a little crushed sesame seed oil or you may distil therefrom a little red oil and other corrosive medicines, and put cotton on top of the oil with a ribbon made of cow's urine, so that it is secure from infection; and if he delays nothing, and the wound begins to open, then leave the oil and treat the wound with drugs that soothe the wound; and then return to your cauterizing until it is healed, and do so by means of this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil according to nature; and of accidental causes, in iron work; and do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that the limbs are suffering from that treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	the hairs red are those that are covered with oil, and they tolerate the sight of his work and weaken the oil all the time. It is therefore necessary to the first one that you look at the oil, because sebel is, and otherwise, and there is no other disease than sebel; so then do this in this way: For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then hold those hairs at a distance from all sides according to his wisdom, and make the hairline thin twice according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	and let them be cut by degrees in two courses according to this form: And let there be two inches between each course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then cut the hairs finely, and wash the blood after another hour, as much as you see remove the hairs forcefully from the oil; and guard that you do not blur the oil at the tips of the spatumiles, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you only capture the hairs forcefully; and when you have done this, if you will, distil into the oil green and red vinegar to corrupt what is delayed from sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have no power to catch all of them in that hour, so make a paste on the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is soothed and assured by the warmness, then begin again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirrour thus is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, so split it on the aposteme, leaving there where it should die, and draw out all the moisture that it has, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, so resect it entirely with this instrument whereof the shape is; and it is called "aspre chief", and let it be done from an iron chief, and be pointed as a lime is pointed in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the broken bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you can feel that the corruption has set; and do not repeat this, but return to the place of dry medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is固着，然后把它转动到你两只手之间，并用手轻轻按压直到你感觉到骨头已经愈合了; 并且不要重复这个动作，但要返回干的药物的位置。如果它已经愈合，而且没有感染，那么就知道它是健康的; 如果不是，那么除了根据上述方法将漏斗带回耳朵外，就没有其他办法了: 也就是说，你把骨头从第二个角度用铁棒翻转过来，并用药水浸泡，当它翻转的时候，铁棒应该是柔软的，就像你看到的那样。
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	然后把它放在骨头上，用手轻轻按压一会儿，然后取下来，不要让它长时间保持在骨头上; 然后把它放到干的药物中，就像我教你的一样，当它变软的时候，就知道它已经愈合了，如果它仍然紧贴着骨头，那么就知道它没有愈合; 只有这样才不会给病人带来痛苦。
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are all cut, and there is no disturbance of the blood, nor decrease, if you lay the patient down, then heal, then put leeching plates or bandages so as not to hurt him, then put on the oil.i. made of acacia and aloe and incense and myrrh, and then strain the oil, and plaster it on bandages and drapes; and the way of the drapes is that you squeeze the drapes enough soft, and double each one in 2 .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of hairs he needs; then strain it through a hard bendail, and begin again with the leeches so as not to hurt him; then take off the leeches and leave the strained oil day and night, and if you see the oil repair, it is good; if not, then begin again with the plastering and bandages and the oil and leeches until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	When the web of a fly is broken
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the web of a fly is broken and it comes apart, then open, and comes like paper so that you can see it; therefore if you cover it, the work is such that you push an needle into the root of the part near the edge until it comes out at the other side, and then push another needle where there are two threads from the edge; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then tie one end of the thread, and draw it tight, then strain the needle and put on the oil of myrrh; and leave it as long as the thread twitches with the web, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never do the wound any harm by pushing the web back into place with a circle of cloth around each part, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have reached their full length, pierce them with a fine needle that comes out completely from the oil, and draw out the moisture of the albugineous pus and cut the hairs, and then remove them so that they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but oil that seems like water coming down, and yet it is not water; and the way to treat the appearance of this dislocation is so: sit the patient upright on a bed, and right side up, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and hold it up while you see the oil come out on top of the hairs; then cut off the oil with a sharp needle, and let it fall away; and see that it does not shine or glisten, and know that it is water, and that the coming out of the oil is not like the appearance of the dislocation as we have said. If you sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine needle and pierce it through the skin, where it comes out completely from the oil; and if it comes out with moisture of the albugineous pus, cut the hairs, and then remove them so that they are healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of water from the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation of the text from Old French to English:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	"After a short rest, and then let the fluid return by itself; when it is fully returned, remove the instrument lightly, turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little of the clear liquid into the oil again, and leave it there. Then put on one side the oil which has been used with plenty of water, and mix it with the pure oil. We, and those who are with us, will put on a light coat with plenty of water."
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	"If almagda cannot enter the oil due to its thickness, for there are some people who have too thick hairs; then you must use the instrument which is called 'alberit'; of which this is the form:"
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre apareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprouve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faisses ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Now then, carefully separate the conjunctive parts, and do not go too far with it, but make it smooth, and pour in the alum, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a  .i. bed-holder coming, so that he sleeps on his back in a  .j. dark room; and he should be deprived of all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him up according to his condition until the third day; then let him lie in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then let him loose until the seventh day; and it is not appropriate that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is appropriate that you tie him up, so that he may mount quickly.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in their country they make alum by pouring water onto the ash, but I have never seen this myself, nor read of it in any books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of aluminum, so that those who do not know them may see; and let them be of pure bronze.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of this mixture be of the most subtle substance, and the rear in three corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	from the charnel on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	And none of these animals are born or neis charnel on the neck; of which there are some that seem to be scorpions at the mouth of the pie; and if there is such a one or not it is char enchanteresse de fux; and if there is a char souef of good color, in that same char of souef let the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and open his nose, and put the oncidium to those chars, and tie them firmly; then take this that you can hold at the spatumile subtle taken from one side, until you know that this char is all oste.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If there is nothing that can be covered, if the opening is for any of the small, light instruments, so that it does not remain stopped; and without raising you up, or an abscess, so that it heals as it should; and if they are malicious abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them as soon as possible, until the swelling is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour or squeeze slowly and steadily or quickly or wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp that is open, like a tube, and conduct it as well; and if you see, then make a closed tube, and let the instrument rest there while they heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the wound over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a wound on the neck causes a disease called "thunder", and grows and becomes very large until it is seen with the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut the head at the beginning, and burn the bone completely, then put fire or medicine over it; and if you delay to cover it until it is very large, if it is hard and dry in color, of poor smell: if not touch it with iron because it is a swollen pustule, for when you cover it once, great evil comes to the patient; and the pustule is touched gently, not with iron because it is dry in color, and you see that he can cover it completely without pain, and cure the site with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	when the neck is cut and cured
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	the sores on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For in the hands of the patient, there appear within the lips hard sores, resembling grain of sand, and smaller and larger; so then you must turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take hold with tweezers and pluck out each part; then apply the vinegar broth to the place, until the blisters are dried up; and then wash it with water from that, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	the chapped lips
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraints et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.
des sordens	Here is the translation of the text line by line in English:
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	"Noz jours ne sont pas assemblées au chef des dents, à l'intérieur de la bouche entre les gencives, des écorces qui sont laides et rugueuses ; et aucune fois sont les dents noires et citrinelles et ternes, jusqu'à ce que la corruption atteigne la gencive, et que les dents soient puantes. Si tu commandes au patient de te laisser tenir par les mains, et que sa tête soit entre tes mains, et que tu arraches les dents ou les écorces qui apparaissent, tant qu'il ne reste rien ; et ainsi fais de la noirceur et du verdâtre, et de la jaunisse et des autres taches, jusqu'à ce qu'elles soient saines ; et si l'on ose le faire une première fois, c'est bon ; si non, si on recommence à le faire le deuxième jour et le troisième, tant que tu aies tout arraché ; et sache que les dents doivent être arrachées avec des instruments de diverses formes, selon ce que l'œuvre démontre, pour ce qui est du rasoir dont on arrache les dents ont d'autres formes que celles dont on arrache les écorces entre les dents ; et ces formes et d'autres soient prêtes avec toi."
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it as much as you can, because this must not be done at all; for this is a very high substance until such time as one has no excuse to draw it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is forced to have a tooth drawn, it is necessary that you are certain about the hurting tooth; often the pain leaves the patient and he thinks it is his sound tooth, and has the tooth drawn; but nevertheless the pain remains because we have already proved this with these honorable men; and when you are certain about the hurting tooth, then you should scrape under the tooth with a strong scraper so as to ward off the gums on all sides; then you place it in your hand or fine pliers at one hole after another until it is well loosened, then you tighten the pliers; and let the patient’s jaw be between your knees, and hold it fast so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	Then draw the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take one of these instruments and push it in from each side lightly, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is stuck and bleeding, then fill it with gauze, where the cracks are; and if it is carefully held between pliers, so that it does not break when it is drawn, and it is necessary to cut lightly under the gum on all sides, then draw it out.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you do well to avoid breaking it, and leaving a part of it, and causing great pain to the patient from the root more than before. And you guard that you do not do so as does the ignorant doctor, who, because of his haste and audacity, often breaks the chariot, and does not properly administer this which we have counted; but instead brings about any kind of disease at the root that he delays, or by the chariot that he breaks, as we have frequently wanted to prove; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the hole with wine or tar and salt; and if it runs red with blood, that often comes from the root, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, so that they do not mute the teeth first, are long tips and large handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold the mu
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in place when pulled, if you put cotton soaked in oil or butter on the joint for two days, until the roots are smooth, then bottle up the pliers that are called "algefri", so that the jaw looks like a file; and let them be shaped inside as a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out to all these grips, it is necessary that you uncover the whole of the root, and put the instrument which is called "al-thalī' ", that is to say, the pales, from which it comes:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be it light or heavy so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by this, it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help yourself with this instrument which has .ij. rains, from which it is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are before in the reasoning of the dens, and of this instrument which seems like great grips, whose is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And so this instrument should be made in such a way that it cannot break; and know that most of the instruments from within are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master surgeons are subtle who try their instruments by themselves according to what their work and the disease show them, for there are many diseases where the old do not teach an instrument because of the diversity of the; And if it does not break the chariot or other bones, where he will lie, if he searches for the instruments that it is right that you said, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let there be large and good-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with medicines fitting for this person, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural form of the jaw, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is right that you should know if the root is after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then the raze; and if it is hot with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is given here, which seems like a small beak, and is made of iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the jaw bone is broken and broken by the pain of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be cut, then he cuts with a knife as this form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also as the bone from which we make needles; and in cutting the tooth, cut with a knife gently so that it does not move until it breaks; then in the end with any razor, and its edge is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then it is necessary to cut the roughness so that it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose,
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth are loose, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press upon what he chews; and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, but it does not help; if you can restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and rots, but gold wire never moves; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain, then take the wire and double it up between the 10 teeth, then put the teeth together with the wire, if there are more than 10, until you feel a tight fit on the healthy side; then restart the tightening gently and carefully, until it does not move at all; and if it relaxes, or the wire comes loose, then tighten it again with another wire; if it takes time and will serve for that whole time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adjustment of the 10 healthy teeth and the 10 missing ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place, fresh after fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and patient should be involved, and never is the form of a tooth of an elk made, and it is put back in its place where it has fallen out, and is held as we have said, and delayed and kept thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To make a cup of copper from the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	No cup is made from the tongue or nature, that comes from it; or by accident of a sore wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person and have his head in your hand, and take his tongue; then take a large copper wire and tie it tightly to the tongue, so that it does not move at all, and if there is pain or no pain, and this is done from a wound, then bite the wire and tie it with a knot; and be careful that the cut does not become too tight, for the artery is nearby; and when you have done this, take hot rose water and dip the tongue in it each night, so that the ring does not harden. And if the pain comes again, apply fire to the fire wound, which is good for this; then cure him with other remedies until he is well,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see any white or black color or hard thing, so that the sick person does not smell it, or touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is declining to yellow, and there is moisture, then pour the wine, and make it with a thin spatulate blade, and deliver from one part and another; and if he does not come to you in your work, put him on vitriole broied until he is healed, and return to your work as long as you draw all of it; then lift up the water of salt and silk, and cure him with other remedies until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	from the throat come boules which are called “godath”, and they are called properly 13. mandules, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is an abscess of small size and red color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron for its blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover, but first look that the abscess is hot and calmed down. Then place the sick person in front of the sun, and his head be in your lap, and he opens his mouth and puts his fingers between his teeth, and presses the tongue onto all the instrument, for this is the shape; and it should be of silver or thin gold as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	So you press the tongue onto all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the hook and put it in the mandule, and draw it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with, then cover the instrument, for this is the shape, which seems a strong thing; and nevertheless his head is crooked, and one side above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or thin gold:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with pliers, for this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cut from one side and not from the other; and when you have cut one of the amygdales, if you cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot, sharp, and easy water, and if they are going away, then gargarize the patient with water, or with cooked pomegranate seeds, or with fennel leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure him as long as he is well; and never let other apothemas be born in the throat than the 20 amygdales, if they are cut like them.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman for an apothema that was lying in her throat, that is to say, one small apothema; and I had well closed up all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for a single day or two days. And the apothema was so high that it had been rained upon 12 times by the 12 passages where the rain entered. So I waited a while, and then inserted an awl into one of the 12 passages, then drew it out, and cut off a large portion of the bow; then I did the same on the other side of the passage where the rain entered, and pressed her mouth shut and pressed her tongue; then I inserted the awl into those apothemas, and some of them came out whole, but a little bit of blood came out; so the woman's passage in her throat was opened up again, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting off that apothema for a long time; and the apothema recrossed itself again, and filled up the place that I had emptied before, until it was very large; so I sewed it up again, and cauterized it inside her throat: so it stayed without growing any larger; and I left those parts, and there was only God who cared for them afterwards.
de l’uve	from the wine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the swelling goes down from the injury to the skin, and it is far away, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, then it is called "swelling". When it has healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the chaps of the abscesses are pacified, and they are thin, then you should cut them; and which is round and not far away, and it is bloody or purple or black, then you should avoid the incision. For there is great danger with this disease. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blueness and its distance, that you cause the patient to sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then stick the onyx into the swelling, and twist it around, and cover it with .i.ii. instruments which I have said in the incision of .i.ii. almonds. And it should not be covered more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .i.ii. almonds, and heal until it is well. And if the patient has a fear of being covered, then you should use an instrument to cauterize his pain. The manner of cauterizing is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your lap, and then he presses his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned, where there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put out his head where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and put the instrument into all the medicine on the swelling; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he sweats and the saliva runs from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down his throat and hurt him; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the swelling for half an hour, until you see it turn black and the medicine's bite is pacified; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument into all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton is soaked through; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and cut it after 2.4 days or 5 days. And if you need to refresh the cauterization of the medicine, then refresh it, and after the cauterization rinse with cold water, and cure with gargles until it is well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, or only the cauterization; if it is cured with fumigation according to this manner, take calamus and ysop and oreganum and rue and chamomile and yarrow and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them in 1. pot, and pour water on it easily, and make it boil; and the pot should be well covered with strong clay, and dip the instrument into the pot according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And of silver or gold, and one of the head bottles in the mouth of the sick man as long as the vapour rises to the vein through the cane, until the vein is dead; then he begins often, until the vein dries up, and keep that you do not make that at the beginning of the coming of the abscess warm, for many things have come there; and do not make that either but at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put it in his head a hook of smoke, so that the mouth of the sick man does not become too hot; because the hook of smoke does not weigh down the vapour on the mouth, and this is good together and saves health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often there comes to the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so that it is convenient that you should take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is convenient that you should make the sick man vomit so that his meat is cooked in his stomach; perhaps if it comes out by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or  .i. slice of dry bread; and he puts a thread to the sponge, and then swallows her; and when she arrives to the place, if she is hard, and then you pull hard; and if she does not come out of that which we have said, take  .i. instrument of plonk according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And take the instrument curved to the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat and has the head lifted up; and keep that you do not touch the epiglottis, that no one of them comes down, or do not put the bone in; and make sure that the sick man swallows the instrument, for if he does not swallow it, then let him throw it away; or he takes it in his hand and moves it forwards and backwards evenly until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood in the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No times is medicinee the blood, if as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not help, then look into the throat of the patient with the sun, because you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, so treat with a small hook, or small claws that are worth to him. And if he is not worth, so take a hair of a dog, and put it in the throat of the patient, then bottle up or drink from the hair  .i. hot, and do this often. And if the patient has a sore throat all day, so take full  .i. cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it run down, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, so spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not spit as we have said, so subfumigate the patient with asafetida, at the instrument that I have told you in the fumigation of the uvula; do this many times, because she will not spit unless you do so. And the way of the fumigation is that you squeeze a pot where there are charbons vis, and place it on a covered vessel to make smoke in the middle, and in the perforation of the instrument; then pour your fumigation onto it, and let the patient put his tongue out into his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the blood; and the blood will now come out, and if it does not, then restart the fumigation many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty things and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then let him rest as much as this treatment requires.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which you treat the blood should be such that you can see the blood, if it is, as when you can see the tongue; it should seem to resemble a pair of scissors for driving into the throat; and have the appearance of a file, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and consider this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the capitis of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The capitis of the abscesses are, according to what this reminder comes from a and b in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in cutting; and it is in 2 ways that one is in its middle semblance, and of what it holds moisture. And the second way if it is for the leus where it is at the core. For the abscess of the chief head is other than that of the fundament, and the abscess of the charnut leu is other than that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if a abscesses don't need to be pierced at all, as long as the bow is dead according to its fulfillment; and if a of such that it is necessary to pierce when it is crut, and do not die at all according to its fulfillment, as if an abscess that are of joint del. For when an abscess comes from joints, and one leaves him as long as he is porris inside, by chance if the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is the cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is of the principal member, and if you delay the perforation as much as it is dead, it will harm the principal member; or it is of the fundament, if you pierce it thus that it be dead; and do not come that you pierce an abscess crut without digestion accomplished, so that one who is of the fundament, that he does not porrise perfectly, and be alongied inside, and i comes fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and this is when the pain is calmed down, and the departure of the fever, and the diminuation of the pain and redness, and the debate and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation where most dependent leu of the abscess, and the place where he opens mues; and be li perforation of long du cors, and if the abscess is as mains or as piez, or in joints and at nerf and arteres, and to all leus igalz where it has no ploieure.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	Here is the translated text:
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translated text:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translated text:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And what is to be known about this in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one should go before in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter on the paste.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	"In the treatment of sore and rocky abscesses, it is lighter because they are full of blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or chief that do not have moisture, and if these are the same Chief-assessments that I mentioned before, as those that come from an old woman's breast; and I found the assessment just like a stone X-high, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one of them were to be cut, it would make a wound as good as a stone. In other Chief assessments, they are such that they depend entirely on their most dependent places, in order to have the bow out; and cure them as is appropriate."
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Of the scrofula Many times has the abscess at the throat, and desolves the armpits, and angers, and never come to any other place or to the skin, and are hot, and are swollen together. And each scrofula is properly within its rib, as well as the nodule and the abscess at the back of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not obey health. In those therefore that you see to be of good disposition to the touch, and seem to be of the color of the flesh, and are mute on either side, and are not drawn out from the neck nor from the artery nor from the conduit, and are not deeply embedded; it is fit that you cut them off from above, and skin each part, and are the twenty-four lips of the throat as one, if you have need, as we have said concerning the abscess at the back of the head; and do this little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut too deep, lest the hand escape, and look not too far forward, lest you should cut too much.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, then put vitriolic acid on the wound, or some powders that restrain blood, and strain the wound; and leave it as long as the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the scrofula is hardened, if there are no small scrofulas at the base, then cut them and clean them. And if there is a large lump at the root of the scrofula, it is not fit that you should cut the scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then apply the dressing.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut all the scrofula, then it is fit that you should gather together the 20 lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there should be no delay because of the size of the scrofula. If it is fit that you should cut off its root, and squeeze it hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, too, depending on, then introduce tendrils with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts that which is delayed from corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, then cure it with ointment with garlic, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the wedge of the throat, which is called "epiglotte", be removed; and one should not seek aid from anyone, since all the veins and the main artery of the disease are at the bottom of the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. mandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the strangulation which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is then necessary when we want to split the epiglottis that we do it desoz 2 or 3 circles or a small slit through, between the 2 or 3 circles or by the quantity of the split in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no charnel, and the vessel is long of it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, and then splits the meat as far as it comes to the charnel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the cartilage, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the throat that jumps out by the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed for which we doubt strangulation, join the .ij. lips of the wound from below the cartilage, and then administer drugs that produce blood, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuicasim says that we should not do this as long as the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect leaves him.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then put a covering over the larynx so that the patient cannot breathe through the wound, and in this way he is preserved from death; and
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and so command the elderly to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iij.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw;
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young lady take a knife and put it in her throat, and she ran to the pond of the palace;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found her as well dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had come out of it, and I saw well that she had not cut a vein or caused any injury except in her throat, and her pulse was far from being firm.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I rushed, and sewed up the wound, and I treated it until she was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the young woman had only a hoarse voice, and returned to her usual self later on.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I know that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large hernia in the color of a yolk, and is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: nature and accident; or nature has nothing to do with it.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And this accident happens in two ways: one is like fatty flesh to us, and the other way is like an abscess coming from us by artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not come to operate fire on but in that which is small, and prove and search in all the intramuscular.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as well as fatty flesh, and cannot do anything, if it breaks, if it breaks like our own, and tries all the bones, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well, and treat if necessary, so that he is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I give the full difference between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is sharp and hot-headed, until the boiling is passed, and is complete; then rest the heat and the fever.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no heat or fever or pain, and contains a kind of medicine that is in the same color as the body, and begins also like a yolk, and grows big;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and most of their colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to cure the head, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its shape comes or the paste which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way of the inquiry of abscesses is that you squeeze or the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the intruder, and take care not to let it fall.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If a cut runs through the skin, as I have said about other abscesses,
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the intruder there is no moisture, knowing that it is greasy, then let him cut it crosswise, and pick it up with tweezers, and scrape it lightly from each side, and take care not to tear it, and you will get it out whole.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot get it out whole, then cut it into pieces so that nothing is left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if I do not wait, if it returns to us again and again;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little while, and if he does not grieve us, then take the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on the wound something that is warm, and heal other wounds until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if we are very ill, then cut the wound with the 3 fingers of the hand, and heal what is caused by the thorn;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wine is opposite or another, then hurry and employ the place of vitriol, and leave it there for 3 days or 3 days, until the wound is putrefied, and return to the cup where it was kept;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation of the text:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	"They are also like the needles used for piercing sorcery, and they are made of yellow gold, iron, or silver, and the ones that are more tested against black lead to encircle the corbels of fistula."
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	"They are of three sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the aperture."
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	"The shapes of the instruments are varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are also instruments with three quadrants that come in three sizes."
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are those who have .iij. coronets, and also they are of .iij. ways; and if there are those who have .ij. coronets, and once a crown only, and they are of .iij. ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these things are sharp, and such I have who do not cut but on one side, from which one shaves the hair, so that the vein or the nerve is not chopped.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these interventions are the aleines returned in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of 3 ways: great, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and don't use any but what is natural to its place, if it is a leg, or an arm, or a breast, or an elbow, or similar things;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make any other instrument small, resembling to the shape of a fist, according to this form, so that it is stifled with blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and never put it in the place that heals by cutting into veins and arteries, and never do it according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and never pump up the breasts of some men when they are corrupted, until they look like a woman's breasts:
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they grow slower and sicker, and those who cure them, if it is according to this form of the line B. until: .
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scorch the fat, and employ the wound with medicine by boiling water, then join the 15 lips of the wound to sew, and heal as long as it is well;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and let him swallow the clean water, and is moistened by its greatness if it has women, if he makes them in 15 ribs on top, with 15 similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one holds the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from the line B. until the line G.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then remove the skin between the .ij. lips, and cut away the fat, and add that which we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, as long as he is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not healthy, or the incision has not been completely made, so that the patient cannot rest, or because of the loss of blood, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it sit until the meat and fat are cooked, then treat it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	the abscesses of the elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The cysts that come from abscesses are handled from hard scrofula or if they have ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line B to line G.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are voided, if you employ cotton wool, and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from this time onwards until they are well.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then do as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the bowels break open, then apply the fire cautery as we have described.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin is tightened over it, then there are often abscesses, and also to the escaping vein and absces
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one pierces it at that point when it is for the artery, then the abscess will be long enough to come out completely.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel stretching; and if it is for the vein, then you should feel a retraction; and if it is for the arteri
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cut this abscess, and most of all when it is dislocated the shoulder and at the neck and mouth other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, the treatment with fire should be avoided, and that of the chief also, and in that of the swelling of an artery cut through the skin from above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the waist as if it were a belt, and separate the artery from the tissues carefully, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then thread a needle and pierce it through the other side of the waist, holding the artery with a double thread of silk, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	and then point out the level that is between the .ij. links of an intermitter as long as there is a space there, and unbind the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then order the cure for a bow-shaped wound, as long as the link is injured;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with a paste made of honey and vinegar, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, so that you have to hold it with your hand where you can feel the abscess all over the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then dip the needle in the oil that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and there is .ii. thread of two, so that you draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or one of the two ends to the two shoulders of the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not secure, then dip another needle in the oil at both ends of the same thread to the incision of the first needle, and stretch out the threads in four directions;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess as much as possible, then cut the excess away from the incision and leave what is tied down;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then wet his head with wine and oil, then administer the treatments for fever and bad smells until he is well.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when the arteries and veins are inflamed, they cause pain in the nerves, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens in the joints of the arms and legs, and in all parts of the body where there are joints; and it is a sign of pain, and its color looks like the color of blood, and it is in many conditions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they have been bound together, if the patient feels pain, and is not perfectly healed, but continues to move;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and be quiet on all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and that which is in joints does not come together with iron: perhaps there will be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is at the head or at the forehead, make the skin with a scythe.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the nails are small, if it has one nail, and cut it in its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the suspension is at the root, and the scorching, then the bone and sews the wound with a stitch, and cares until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	with large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No times has there been in bellies and not any other part thelull, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of ash, and is the subtle root, and the big knot; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a home who had .ij. bellies that were more like fungi than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were broken, and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I measured and found one to weigh sixteen ounces, and the other seven. The work of this chapter is that if you look at the patient, he is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist and has a fine root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If the cup is too large, and fire cautery is not possible in your presence. For the surgeon often makes too great a wound with the knife, and it will cause pain without your help, so hurry to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient sweating and fearful of the incision with fire, then take a well-made piece of string, and bind the arteriole as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to cut the string as long as it binds the arteriole, and feel through it for work; and if the roots are thick, so have fear at cauterizing it by the belly, but you can well cauterize half of it,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	And then cauterise him so that he does not come again; and then treat the wound, and keep so that you do not cover the plug which is of yellow color and of poor sense and of milk-like substance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that has become inflamed, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer below.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the meat is boiled
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	As the appearance of the boiled meat comes by fire cautery of wound or incision of syph, and is on the belly and there are some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the flesh and by the issue of the bile, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and an opening of various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed to its two sides so that it returns, and then returns again, and perhaps is caught, and increases much at the entrance of the bath, and by strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then opens by these signs, the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is by wind, then it is a breath in the chest, and the work if you look at its appearance is that of blood from an artery, or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you leave the patient to heal on his own. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on the treatment of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his bowels, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the bowel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then instruct him to move slowly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the place that you have signed with all your hands,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then make the top half of the apophtheos up to all the large hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then fasten him with a strong thread or rope of fine silk securely, and let us hold him fast;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then extend the top half of the apophtheos over the thread, and dip your index finger, and feel the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find that he is caught in the thread, if he slips, then dip the intestine at the end of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you see the fever, if it takes hold of the flesh, and cut off its excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery is against him or he has a vein, then he should breathe deeply, and then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and thread them with .ii. strings, and thread the .ii. needles through what you have made, so that you have pierced it;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	and then stretch the abscess in .iii. leaps above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place open until it has rotted, and cut out the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut when it is soft and rotten, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood where you see moisture, then heal the hole of that which it covers, and bind the hole.
dou chancre	the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of the appearances of ulcers, and how one should work with medicines, and how one should prevent the cure of iron; and we say that the ulcer is inherited in the marrow, and great care must be taken in the cure, and the ancient man said that when ulcers are in a good place where they can be cut like an ulcer on meat, or in a pot, or in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is small; and when it is large and old, then one should not approach it, for I have never healed any such; nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be cut, as we have said, is that you never purge any black blood; then make it healthy if it has shown repletion, then afaite the blood.i. good ground for doing the work; then throw your onions or ulcers, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press hard on the spot in your hand or on any thing, and if it resists the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stopped; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
de ydropisie	On gout
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	On gout
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	lieve the patient straight in your hands, and the minister pressing the belly at the lowest part of the body, then take the spine-like spatumile according to this form: And let it be cut from both sides. a point, and always so that it cannot come up to the intestine when you put it on, and cannot be wounded; and let it not be so thick that it cannot be inserted into the patient's body:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look if the gout is deposited toward the intestines: it is necessary that you split on both sides of the arm pit.iij. two right above the elbow; and if the gout is due to liver disease, then your split should be on the left side of the armpit.iij. two; and if it is due to mucus, then it should be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient lies down on the split so that the superfluities do not run into the weak one; and
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and squeeze your hand into all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as well as when peeling back by an inch or so; then pierce the syfac until the spatumile comes to a natural stop, and this is the hole for water, then tighten it further, and bottle up this instrument from which there is a shape: And it looks like a silver cane that is fine, and is of brass or copper that is very light, and has in its portion  .i. small opening; and where it costs on one side, .iij. openings; and 2 on the other side, and 1 on the other; and the head is cut so as to resemble a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes cuts feathers:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top of the head is the temple, so that when the instrument comes to water, he should now bend over it on the instrument; empty half or one-third, because if you empty more than that at that time, perhaps the patient will die through the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will shake his palms, or come close to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick person are, and his pulses; then tighten the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the pulse that stops at the syfac, of which I have spoken, so you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument the other day, if you see the sick person suffering, and tighten a little quantity of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not make any fire, and beware of going out in the cold until it has stopped raining a little. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave water on him, then let the cure of the grave or mud be hot, and by sweating or bathing and under the sun, and let it turn black from drinking; and let the cure of drying medicines continue as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I have said above.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child born with a small foreskin or one that is not in its place should be circumcised too soon, for if it does not have enough time to form a prepuce, then a very thin prepuce of leather will form according to this form: then tie the prepuce with a thin piece of leather and fasten it for 15 or 20 days until he has urinated, and then release it; and if by chance it has not been properly circumcised, because the urine that comes out is strong, then release it.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who have a small foreskin or one that is not in its place should be circumcised when they are old enough to form a prepuce, as we have said before, if it becomes thicker. Those who do not have a foreskin at all because their foreskin does not reach the top of their penis, so they cannot urinate until their penis is erect; and they cannot conceive by anything that the material does not come out until the marriage, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the cautery is that the sick man lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are held as a pen is held, so that it pierces in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the escape of blood, which often happens, and if it does happen, let the one who stops the bleeding stop it, and cure the wound until it is well.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times a sore comes to the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are bad ones and good ones; so that you should squeeze them with great subtlety, and cut and grind them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure it with diafinicon until it is well.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the sore is malicious, of color and pus, then it is appropriate that you apply cauterization to it. When you have cut it, and the sore is in the peil of the penis, and some of it is inside and some outside, then it is appropriate that you take out the sore that is inside first; and when it has healed, then heal the outside one. For when you heal them together, unless they are firmly closed, then the hair of the penis will be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into its hair and where the cow's hide was; so it is appropriate that you cover all that is black and corrupted, then put it on plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from pomegranate skin and times, then heal it with other cures until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the blood flows from the wound, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizes help in all the aforementioned arrangements: namely, at the flow of blood and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should either tie or lead with a string of leather, and make the patient urinate; and when the hair grows on the head of the penis that has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an ulcer, then it is appropriate to scrape it with one instrument until all the ties are released and the head of the penis is free.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if this is a difficult thing to devise, then you should scrape it with a spatumile at the root of the penis and the skin; then carefully remove it between one and two inches, and place a thin cloth of linen soaked in cold water on it, so that it does not scar.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not dislocation if it is done properly like the other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary to do it well and lightly for the sake of salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcisio of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only those whom we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have heard the most part of the masters and the wise men who did circumcision under the navel, and for strength, and for all a new wonder; so was it done that he might not touch that which is above and delay that which is below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or if it is uncovered again, and the pain is double, and the cleansing which is from the navel is not assured to the point of the member; and by chance the nail escapes the iron, and corrupts the work, and often there are born so that there is no need of cleansing, and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleansing which is made for strength to all the thread of the line I have found the goodness of experience, for the strengths cut out rightly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Car when you press your hand, if they are cut evenly at 12 inches long; but the thread should be well-woven around the leather; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think that you do not make him tie the thread tightly around the shaft so much, and then cause him to wait in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then make the thread rest between your hands straight, and tie the forces between your hands where the nail goes in, neither of the tools; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or hit, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the shaft is in; then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie another 12 inches of yarn; and hold it by the second loop to the thumb and little finger, and tie between the two threads, then loosen the knot carefully and turn the top of the head.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood run a little and a little, for it is bleeding; and put powder on top of the powder - a drape of glue made from an egg white that has been boiled and diluted with rose water, mixed with oil of roses and freesia, and leave it there until the next day, and the doctor will cure it if it remains unwell.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces for cleaning is this: the two joints should be soft and cut, and the joints should also be as long as the hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it has passed three days and that which is dislocated in the root of the penis is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess of the skin is calmed down and the scab is slightly taken off; then wrap it up as well as you can, and keep away from the part of the penis, for this will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retentement de l'urine si est quant li cuve s’en va par la venes; et si il s’en va par petite chose, se covient que tu tiens li cuve par petite chose qui pouveit le faire sortir, si com on a dit plus avant.
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The reten of urine is of an operation of stone, or of frozen blood, or of bowels, or of horses, or of similar things, which we have spoken of in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not relieved, and you see the retention for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and let the feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he can lie down as much as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder toward the removal of the stone from above, because the urine is relieved.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with all the instrument which is called "siringue", of which this is the form: and let it be of fine lightweight silver, as the feathers of an owl; and let the cane be of a palm long and a half, and let it be sharp at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take .i. double thread, and tie it to the tip of a piece of wool or cotton, and bottle the tip of the thread inside the siringue; and fill the surplus of the wool and the bottle up to the tip of the siringue, then apply oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and the urethra with moistened oil and olive oil and water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And then begin again with the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and let the patient be even.
des maladies de la vessie	For diseases of the bladder:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When bladders are burned or sore, and you see water and medicine in it, then make the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if a 1/3rd hole: 1/2nd from one side, and 1/4th from the other, as you see; and let his hair grow long by which the medicine can be well removed without adding anything, if we can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see the medicines going into the bladder, put the chief of the scalp in the moisture, and draw with it while pulling, which will draw out the moisture to the scalp, and then push hard at the pull; if the moisture goes in, and now comes to the bladder, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the shape of the subtle clister which we use for the bladder: if so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or wood, and the head is higher; and take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture which you see clisterizing the bladder in it, then tie it together with a double thread of good thread, and heat the moisture coming out of the bladder on the fire; then put the chief of the clister in the bladder, then draw your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into .i. a circle, and pierce it around; then put in .i. a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle together as one would join .i. a door, and put inside what you wish for oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the division of stone into parts and their extraction together with medicines; and I have also mentioned the difference between a stone that is hard and one that is soft, and how to size stones; and regarding the bladder and the womb, I will explain both clearly and concisely.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is hard in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps out of the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and when it opens, it softens the patient's womb and makes it move many times, and then becomes hardened again; and the foundations of it are washed away; and it is lighter for those who are between infancy and maturity until they reach 20 years old, and heavier for those who are past middle age, and milder for those who have small stones than for those who have large ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary to purify the patient first by enema, in order to drain all the bile which is in the intestines. For it is not appropriate at any time to seek stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and move them to defecate, so that the stone comes out completely from the bladder, and never go up from its place; then make him sit between your hands, and his hands are dislocated from his thighs, so that the bladder is all downhill; then examine and touch it from within.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut it on the stone. And if it does not move when touched from all sides, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and complete; then press it at its base, and examine the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, so that the amine is at the neck of the bladder; then press with your two fingers, and bottle it up to defecate where you see it being cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands that he extends with his right hand the coions above, and with his left hand holds back the skin which is over the coions in the part where one cuts; then pour the spermatic fluid copious, from which it is this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And set between those who are between the hip bones and the pelvis, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side of the waist; and be right on the stone, and your two should be together or to the pelvis, and be the size of the traver so that it is wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Now and then the press if there is such a thing as a pelvis, that it does not work hard; and know that there is a part of stone where there are angles and edges: let it go out; and if there is a part that is soft, like a flower, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	So that if it is soft where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not go out, then you must hold it with tweezers that are like a file on the head; or pull it out with a small sharp tool. If you cannot do this, then open it with a knife and cut off the tip.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one stone, first pull out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then grind it down, and the smaller ones after if there are any. And if it is very large, then cut it so that it comes out easily; for 10 things come to the patient: either he dies, or his urine flows freely because his bladder does not close; but you must try to pull it out or cut it into pieces with tweezers.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, if the wound is hot, apply aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly with a wet cloth, dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then tie up the patient's neck with a knot for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if it is well oiled with oil and water, then treat the wound with afininicon ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and frosts of blood in the bladder, and if it is held by this way so that the urine is not passed in one way that it is lost with the blood: then put your finger in the wound, and extract the blood, because if it remains, it will freeze the bladder, and let it out.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and then lift the wound with water and sand and earth, and assist it in all ways that you can until it is healed; and it is necessary that you tie the legs together, and gather the remedies on top of them.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is where he is conducted from the penis, and fixed in there, and the urine cannot go out; if the cure of this, that I have said above, that you cut him many times, is on excuses from cutting by this cure. I have already tried thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take in the iron according to this form and be at three angles fixed in one beam:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a file and put it inside the penis at the base of the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then tap the file lightly against the stone in the penis; and turn the file from side to side, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another angle; if then soon comes the urine, then press your hand on what is delayed outside the stone which is inside the penis. If it suddenly breaks, and jumps out with the urine, and heals the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the urine can come out by this stone or by another part, and comes to the penis, then let it go: but if it can come out by another part than the penis, then is the stone broken, and jumps with the urine. If you can pierce the stone from another part besides the penis, then is it broken; and if you pierce the urine inside the stone which is in the penis, and comes out through the stone; then is it delayed. And if you cannot do this by any means so that it harms him, then take 1/4 of an inch file from the stone and 1/4 of an inch from above, then make the incision at the base of the stone between the two lines, and extract it strongly, and wash out the frozen blood which is in the wound; and cure as long as it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There shall come a time when stone is found in women, and if it ever comes, there is great grief, and it is defended by 3 things: the first is that peradventure the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well skilled who reveals herself to the mirror, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that peradventure one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of the man, because it covers to make a deeper cut, and has great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessary, if you can find a wise woman, and if not, then don't worry. Seek out 1. a wise woman who knows all of the art; and the present a skilled woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to make that which you command of the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well that his wife is a virgin: then it is appropriate for him to put out his right hand or foundation and seek the stone; and if she makes it true, if she binds her right hand, and he recommends that she puts out her right hand with the disease, and wants and presses his left hand on the bladder form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she makes it true, that it is appropriate for her to move it from the entry of the bladder to the root, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then put your hand on the stone in the middle of the limb, where it is cut off, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his right hand from the stone or root, and make the first small incision;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put your hand on the stone in the middle of the limb, where it is cut off, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move his right hand from the stone or root, and make the first small incision; then blow the wound dry, if you feel the stone so deep into the wound that the stone can come out again, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and which have rain. If you know the appearance, then know the outcome."
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it does not come out, then put vinegar in the wound, and hold it for an hour until the stone is completely removed; then return to your work, until the stone is completely out, and have the tools that I told you about in the extraction of the stone ready to help you with your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if you go without it, and this is the artery that is severed, then put the powder on the spot and squeeze out the blood and fat, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, except by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the veins have closed, if you return to your work, then let the stone be far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernial hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	of the hernia
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramose stuff is so feeble that it comes to union, and expands that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And so it comes to union by impact on the joints, and this moisture is of many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and it happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs of distended things: for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscesses are tender, .i. short and like the shape of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then the abscesses are tender with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syfac, so he feels good; so when you see to know the color of the moisture, then try all of the inner part because its shape is before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the inner part, judge who is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and cover him with drapes; and let there be no light but the light of the moon.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	and then sit on his left side, and command the minister that he sits on his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs of the chest of the testicles; and let there be no light but the light of the moon.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Take then the spit-mule, and cut off the skin of the cow among him long until the end of the loins, and so your sawing all straight in cutting off the skin of the cow until the white syfac, and the scorch lightly according to the will.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the syfac plain of water at 1 . large opening, and draw all the water out, and then put your spats on, and raise the syfac up; and do not touch the hair of the cow, but only scorch it lightly; cut all or in pieces separately the cost of him finely, so that if you don't cut it well with a sharp edge, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the spitting was for your work, so that you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syfac; then join the 21 skin pieces of the cow's hair at a seam, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the spitting corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you lay the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the corruption of blood; then cut the cow's hair at all the suspension, and draw out the spitting, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is mixed in two parts together, knowing that there are two branches; then cover the other part with it as you did the first, and wash away the blood, and put another wet one on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another wet one on the two branches, and put felt pads on top of them, and wrap up all the length with this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two felt pads, and make them of wool according to this shape and join them by stitching in the girdle of the shirt, and one of the shoulders hangs down to the back, and the other to the shoulder part; and the other two hang over the two arms, and are all joined together in the loop of the shirt;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and there is no need to use medicine of this chapter in place of a iron ring, and it is necessary to take a thin surgical knife, and heat it as we have said, so that the white medicine that contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you use fire cautery according to this form, and pierce it like a snake, and scorch it with this fine fire cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And dip it in all the ways that you can, until you drain everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the bone; and know that this work is safer; and move with caution to avoid blood loss, and move with care so as not to harm the cuts.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess or blood loss or any other thing, then treat what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	and if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then let it be pierced as we told you before, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have said that the snake's bite is poisonous,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	If he is sitting, lift him up; then pierce the apophelis in the part of the loins to all the wide spasmile, and place the piercing long of the body; and make the orifices large so that all the water runs out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the place, and bandage it, and leave so that the rest of the water runs out, then heal him until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and do not let the water run out into the mouth of the wound, but it is good that you put a feather or an instrument used to drain the water from the dropsy, so that it takes shape as above; and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 15 days or more, and when it is gathered, as before, and in this way the patient will be healed within his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the apophelis of the loins
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	That said, in this chapter of the book there are many fears; therefore I believe that it is better to let it be.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from the horns, and most often from the joints; and this is by much chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to know: through excess sour bile and water that is spread in the joints, or from impact; or
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the bone; and does not ache, and is an abscess full of pain;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes is a painful and piercing abscess, and of a pale color, and never comes from a vein, or swelling in the leg.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, if you place your fingers on it gently;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and only comes when you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	What is made of the seeding of wool is known by its disposition to the expression of touch on the two.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and he can do very well with this treatment, and with other things, in terms of size;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and is that you clean the curd from the cheese, then put the wool on top, and treat it with white of an egg, and deliver the suspension on all sides of the wool.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the wool has already been soaked in this way with these new cheesecloths, so it is convenient that you then take the wool and the curd.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is air-dried with the medicine, or in those who are inside the vessels, then you must deliver all of what is held, and the cup rings around.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the lamb is behind him, then you must kop it all, and take out the uvula, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, take wool soaked in oil and wine to the wound, and then apply other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the aposteme of the cations
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient grumbles when he goes;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this disease is very similar to that mentioned above;
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you the work of it, according to those who did so in ancient times;
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on .i. an easing seat, then pour the suspension of the cowries down your throat.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessel that are near to the penis, and make them form and extend.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then chop with a sharp knife at the root of each vessel, until they are uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then I stick a needle where it has .i. double thread, and tie it to the first place where its sight has come, and tie it quickly to the other head;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then put on a cloak in the middle right, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as you would with other bowels, so that no vassal cries out because of pain when he defecates;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there comes no harm, and all the bowels come out, so it is necessary to draw the bowels of all the vassals;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	and so he does not lose his hair due to the incisions of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	Of the symptoms of this disease if they are due to a section that causes the syrup, or extension along the abdomen in the part of the anus, so that the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the bowels;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this rupture is where the syrup, or extension of it, comes from; and these four ways of being caused come from: from impact, jumping, bellowing, lifting a burden, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is of the extension of the medicine, if it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even until almost full, so that the medicine presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the medicine, that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscesses are diverse in appearance, with skin discharge, and this is by the exit of the intestine and the course of the medicine away from the body.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never does it move around with the intestine, and is held back, and makes great pain for the patient to suffer, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for fear, so it is avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of cauterizing so you order the patient that he keeps the intestine to his hand inside the wound if he can get back in;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be careful on his neck between your hands, and gently pull the cheeks apart;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then extend the tongue out far above the upper teeth, and peel back the skin of the cheeks;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then pour into them from the loins down with the needle according to what you need in order to open the wound, and be like this that you can take it out again;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the skin from the testicles as far as the hair grows, until the white part of the flesh is completely exposed;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then place your second finger in such a way that it follows the shape of the scrotum, in such a way that it goes between the white part that is completely exposed and between the second white part;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate what is behind the scrotum, and between the second white part; and then move your left hand towards the back of the testicles, and place the white part at the top of your right hand, and hold the skin of the scrotum towards the navel;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command to the minister that he extends the staff above, and from this who is ahead behind the tie;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and examine your two sides if there is any of the intestine wrapped or white as fat hard, and if you do not find anything, then pour into the abdomen desoz;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or there is .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and the bottle in the back part of the fat, which is after the skin of the testicles; then cut the joints that appear of the threads, until there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then put together one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is desoz the skin of the testicles, with a strong thread of .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	and then wrap the heads of the files, and join them together with .ij parts, so that no vassals who feed them may enter in to us, because an abscess does not come;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the thread thereof carefully according to the first long .ij. of that, and after these .ij. threads leave a space which is two fingers wide between the two threads, and after these two threads leave a space which is as large as a finger's width between the two threads;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the others according to the length that the thread of the horse carries; and then sew in the part which is between the leather of the coins, so that it does not sag, and the bow, as we have said above;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	and then bring wet wool in oil, and put it in the wounds, and this thread which we have spoken of above.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And there is no fire cautery of white lead that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and he leaves the ligature as long as it cries out for him; and if it delays in crying, let it be raised by warm water, and put on what we have said, as long as it cries.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with other cures until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from a hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to attempt the cure with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old one said that it is made like this: as you tie the strings together in a bundle, after cutting them slightly on one side of the limb; and
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then tie it tightly with a thong, and cure the abscess from this one who is affected, as long as the strings are leaking; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No time comes without a wound, as we have said, and open the veins; and do not let any of the bowels come out, and if some do come out, it is little, and repair every hour; and
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and wherever it stays too long at this point, believes the wound or pus until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and where there is extension of pus which is in the grooves, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and open.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure if it is by cauterizing, as we have said before; and it is never cured with fire in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then place the cauterizer at the edge of the wound according to the quantity of 2/3:
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then pull out the medicine which is behind the skin that follows, and then take the ring and put it on the apparent place of the medicine;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then press to perfection on the belly, then cut the .ij. apparent places of the medicine on top of the ring, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then pull out the ring, and do not cover the medicine or extend any other thing, as I told you in the cure of the ramose intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then treat with the cure for wounds. And when you cover the threads, if the wound is healed, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The medicines are constipating, and have no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is soft in this place, and more nearby to save.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the skin
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Several times the leather of the skin is softened in certain men, for since the hairs that are within are softened, it may be seen; and it is necessary, when one cleans him, to put the leech on his back, and to soften the leather which is natural; then join the 11 lips together with one stitch or 21 tightly; then cover between the stitches, and treat him as for other wounds, until he is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	with fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
des hermofrodites	Here is the text translated into English:
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
de la tentigene	of the snake
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Of the snake: Tentigene is a char placed on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and no woman has as great a hand on it as a man, and it is the cure. You should take the surplus of the tentigene to your hand or toes, and cut it lightly; and do not cut it too completely, lest blood come, then cure it with another cure until it is well; and at another char that is born in the mouth of the mare, and use it, and perhaps jump off, and it is according to its appearance a cow disease, and for this they called it the "old cow disease". If you cut it, as we have said of the tentigene, and cure it until it is well.
de erratique	of the errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Of the errant: Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as  .ij leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez. Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancریت qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
des apostemes de la marris	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many ways of treating an abscess can arise in the breast, as in Chancre and pustular abscesses, herpes and esthiomes, fistulas and hemorrhoids, and pustular abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division. It is therefore necessary that in this treatise I should explain how to treat a pustular abscess that arises in the breast, which is not like an abscess that is deep; and if you know the art of iron, then note that if an abscess is hot at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die as long as the pain is relieved; and then place the sick person on a chair, and put three small chairs under him where he leans, and support his legs with his hands and join them well with a good bond; and then suck his bile towards his left ribcage, and introduce the instrument by which one treats the mouth of an abscess, from which comes its form; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you put a finger first to check the depth of the abscess, so that what enters the instrument does not come in more deeply than it should and do no harm to the sick person; and if the instrument is large, then cover the depth of the abscess with linen fabric so that the instrument does not cause any discomfort; and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top, and darken the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and his hand becomes soft, then cover it with a cloth, leading to the main part; and when the bowels are emptied, then you must place in the wound wet tents made of oil or green dry oil; and put the tent outside the wound at the depth of the breast, and place them on both sides of the wound and under the other hand, wet with water or boiled roses; then let him continue to treat for two days after the poultice has come out, until he is healed; and do not raise the breast and the wound by using a hot water and honey douche, and then only use hot water or roots of lillies and aristolochia long cooked. Then remind him to treat again. And if the wound heals in the breast, then you should guard against treating with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translated text:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby is stuck to her mother's breast by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtue of milk is weak, then she should sit upon a saddle or the woman should hold it; and make her fat oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour the broth between her two breasts from which this form comes.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If the baby is stuck to her mother's breast by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the milk is weak, then she should sit upon a saddle or the woman should hold it; and make her cook oil or fenugreek, and then pour the broth between her two breasts from which this form comes. And split the second one, and chop off her fingernails as much as the moisture that is in them runs out; and grab the woman's belly as much as the baby drops, and if it doesn't drop, then it is necessary to make the woman drink fenugreek musk with oil of sesame; then let her grab and shake it, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: so now the baby. If the hands come out strong, then it is necessary to pull them gently little by little; and if they cannot come in, then put the woman on .i. seat, and make her lift her feet up; then take down the seat from the ground, and rub her, that she does not stand up; and if the hands cannot come in, and the baby dies, then chop off her hands with the knife that is before placed, and pull out the child, and do it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the baby's birth on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When a child falls on its feet, so it comes to put up there.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and then stretch the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just as the feet are stretched, so he commands to stretch it, and makes it tremble with fear;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if you jump, God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	and if it does not happen as we have said, little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	and if it does not happen as we have said, take muscillaige of alyssum, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and place on top of nature of woman inside and away this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then put her sit in water bath until it is soft the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened soft, then put her .i. necklace of myrrh, and leaves it, and leaves for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then put her sit on .i. seat, then make her shake and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly lightly, because the baby is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if I put the ball in his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on his neck, and let hang down his feet, and be laid upon a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then put his hands on his belly, and draw out his intestines as far as they will go;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if it does not fall, take its feet and move it forward, then put your hands under its belly.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and squeeze the child little by little; and instruct the woman to strain herself as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the exit of the child who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to take care to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	Here is the translation of the provided text:
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then have her sit up in bed and stretch out her legs straight."
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then provide the muscle relief that I have described;"
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she is not pregnant, then have her sit on a chair, and then study how to reduce the hand;"The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and warm the child according to the natural form, and its doing is to tremble, and it is ordered that she warm while the baby is away.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's exit on his neck, and spread his hands, and his face turns towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	then take hold of his hand, then turn it in and out slightly, and gently warm it up;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when he is even, then put on top of the natural muslin cloth and oil, as we have said before, and instruct her to move slightly;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the fire sits on .i. seat, and he orders that it is warmed; and the fire shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner in all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this way to all the second part, if you cut off the second knuckle, as long as the moisture is empty;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it is pinned to its face and to its neck, so that it copes with the water, not being held back, and the prisoner dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then pour the child inside, as you have done so far, and instruct the woman that she do not bathe.
adonques si istra legierement.	then gently lift it up.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins' exit.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Says that twins are often born, and only once a twin is born; and this is not an unusual thing, and such things sometimes happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live, if name alone.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know who, that they may be multiplied, and are denied by the doctor who devises them, who is tied to the fire;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never happen naturally as we all do, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they hurt, so the cure, as we have said, and the subtle doctor, and quickly and lightly do what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and make such as it deserves for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No time is wasted in the formation of the marris i.e. or iij or iiij or vj or vij etc. up to xv, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and cover so that the bailer knows everything, for by chance similar things might come about;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	If you do this according to what is right.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose child has died in her womb, as I said in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are constrained to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if you know that the woman is of sound health, and has not had any accidents or fears of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary for the woman to be supported on her back, and her knees bent downward, and her legs raised up.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister to touch it with oil from .i. parts, or she be laid in bed so that she is not treated for the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with oil from alfalfa and sesame seeds, and with musk and castor oil; then anoint her hands with these oils and these muskillaiges;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then pour into the mouth of the woman slightly, then hold it there while she swallows; then pour into her mouth three drops or so,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care so that he does not fall off, that he goes down on his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if the arrow enters into the hair or into the neck or into the mouth or into the throat or near the ribs or in the jaw or under the chin;
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it falls to the ground, he should pick it up and touch it with his hand; and if he pricks himself, he should hold it back; and if he hits him on the side, he should not move;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he hold the arrow in his right hand, and place the bow between his two left hands, and lightly pull the arrow with his right hand, and insert the arrow into any of the places we have mentioned, until it comes out empty;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the onyx:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then put against .I. another onyx, or the tier so that extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then extend it evenly in moving from one side to the other, so that they come out, and the onyx teeth are held in place, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part stops, so anoint it with oil on both sides, and push it in that part, and draw the other party;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there is no delay at all, then put it this way or higher place, and do that as long as it comes out all at once.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back because of the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	If it is necessary that you wrap him up with a cloth, as long as he comes out all at once;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then wrap the cloth around the joint of the foot or the knee, and in the other hand, do the same thing with the other foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and he is stuck in the birth canal, or his head is acute and assembled,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it's necessary that you squeeze the spine-spitted between your two hands, and force the head and pull out the acute one;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you hold it with the instrument that is called "almidah", from which the form comes with the instruments or ointment that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus himself makes the child' head very acute naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then cut the bones with shears,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then he pulls out the shoulder bone with force, if it is broken, until the moisture that is there comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces so you can eat it.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or comes out from the sides, then pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he falls on his feet, then is the slight traction, and we bring them to the mouth of the mare's milking.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	If he is dislocated at the belly or breast, then cover with a cloth wrapped over your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and press the belly or breast, as much as the moisture that comes out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if another member is dislocated and the head remains in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	If the bucket is full of water from the well, and brings it up to the mouth of the well;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then pour in one-quarter of a pint of wine, and stir it well; then drink it up all at once, and do not stop;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the well is contracted by a hot liquid that has come to it, so that it cannot be used, then you must not disturb it.
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	there are certain things that should not be eaten with this water, such as greasy or moist food;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and they are administered with plasters, and cut with sharp and moistening tools.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it is stuck to his collarbone, and you can put it in line, then administer what we have said about the live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one does not have the power, then let him be cut into pieces, and nothing of the second shall be left.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then administer what we have said about the warm feet that come from the mare's milk;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flow occurs, if it is put in water restringing, and other cures are administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had been torn open, one was dead then counselled another, and rejected the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the wound began to heal, and it healed greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long, and could not stop the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on plaster of great attraction, and there put an arm, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I wanted to see the wound, and with my hands I took out the bones, as long as the woman was in better shape;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and wait for the woman long ten hours, and it was stuck a little bow out of place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I do not remember this paste before that because when the master tries an strange thing, he knows how to put help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the married woman to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressure, with which we weigh the books; and at .ij. turns to .ij. shoulders of .ij. limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns shall be more delicate than the girdle, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let it have a mouth two inches wide, and the tree edge two inches wide, and a length of one palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the six inches be made of two supports from this same wood, which are joined together on one side, with a length of half a palm or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and the two supports are set in the mouth of the mask so that they open when the horns are turned;
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more delicate and lighter in appearance, made of ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the claws;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has .ij. chisels and .ij. tools, so that you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you open the jaw with all the instrument, so that the woman sits on .ij. beds, legs spread and feet out;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the .ij. chisels together in the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	And then work your hand on all the instrument, as you did with the claws evenly, according to the quantity that you saw open the mouth of the mare, until the ball moves this way and that.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all raised up, and it has many similarities; and when you see them put together, the work is quicker and higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not prepare the instrument beforehand, it cannot be excused because of its need.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second one is restrained at birth, it is necessary that you command to the patient that she retires her tongue, and then makes it gag with cold water, and draws your hands to the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it falls because of rain, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	and if not, it is good. If it does, he puts a covering or lid, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, as calamus, rut, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or none of them, are boiled or simmered in water over the fire; then put a strap or lid on the pot, and the other one at the mouth of the wound,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let the vapor rise inside the wound; then make it sweat, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If a second operation is done.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this cure and is not well, instruct the balia to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or musk-root, and then pour it into nature,
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and wants the second; and when she has found it, if she grabs it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the marriage does not break at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but then move it lightly from side to side, and then tie it; if she comes and undoes herself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is wide open, we have said the cure for sneezing, and for inhaling herbs smoke;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not cause any of what we have said, be careful so that you do not follow the advice of those who treat with cow's milk;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the one who has a wound in his mouth, you lay him on the lap of the woman, and then cauterize with four-part oil;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it will not heal, and then will come again; but nevertheless, when it has put on a bad smell in the stomach and in the head, and blisters the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then there are suitable fumigations for this: no one has tried fumigation with nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument by which one smokes the woman during the retention of the flowers and the second if this is so:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like to see a snake, and put the thin head in the place, and wide shoulders above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be on the coals, and the smoke until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but a subtle and skilled physician will stop them with a sharp knife.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is convenient to pierce the foundation that the skilled physician has at his disposal, and he does not pierce it with a sharp knife, and binds up the wound so that it does not touch,
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if one wants to pierce the other skilled physician's finger, and does not boil it or scold it, but hears it say that it is good to pierce;
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, put a stick in his hand and leave his hands open, and be careful when he walks to go upstairs.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no time for the sudden return of the wound or abscess; if it comes to cover suddenly: if it is cured, as we said about the stick.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from the foundation are difficult and painful; those that come from the base of the finger or in the space between the iji parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and no longer are these fistulas persistent; and they are known by the one who has an ejection or windiness when the patient makes an ejection, and perhaps in a jump.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there is a fistula that pierces up to the bladder, and only up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the crotch, and up to the nape of the neck.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so recognize the fistula persisting to the foundation, and not persisting.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and is that you plug your little finger or foundation, and plug a thin needle of brass or iron in the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if it has curvature, if you plug a thin piece of string or, for example, a horsehair, as long as you feel the string or hair on your little finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is no perforation, discharge, or vision loss, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	If it does not pierce, then you are in a hurry to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is piercing until the bladder or until the conduct of urine, if it does not stop running, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it pierces only up to the hip joint of the pelvis, if he tries going up to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting and no pain in the entrails, if he has already been there for a while, and there is no medicine or instant remedy;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas persists no cure but work, and the vanity of foolish mirth which they entwine themselves with.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for health by fire, as I have experienced, so
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and let the patient lie between your hands on his back; and let him raise his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be bent towards his stomach; so
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour water into an ark or bucket if there is any curvature, until you know that the ark comes;
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain in his foot, then you should put your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	He will feel the pin prick; and if you cover or uncover it between your thumb and index finger, then you know that it is painful;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not cause any pain, then it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	All things have their remedies, but some are difficult to cure; however, with the right treatment, they can be cured.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid which one makes, if it is that one warms up the fire-cautery according to the largeness of the fistula, as has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and dip all hot in the fistula, until it comes off easily from the bottom; and do this .ij. times or .iij., until you know that these feathers which are made like an owl's feather are burned; who,
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then dip the tent-curtains in water and burn them, until that feather falls off, and then patch it with an ointment, wrapping up the feather and mending it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, it is good. But if not, otherwise it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it attempts to go in, and does not pierce until the tip which is at the foundation, and between your two fingers put a thick covering of tar or of resin, and you see the fistula at those who support the covering from below;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the covering of the beginning of the fistula, and is pressed together before the tent, and then cauterize after, until it comes to the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered, and shall be cured; then take those tar-covered ones that seem like an owl's feather, and there is none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you go without, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with medicinal broth.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cauterizes 1.2 bones things: that is to say, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood, and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then the doctor of wet tents bakes or dries them in a dry place, until the leather softens, and sets fire to the joints while they are still soft.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	and then treat the wound with dry herbs that burn easily in hard wood, and the medicines are dried up.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once it is restored, it is healed and does not come back again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up just short of the foundation, and is distant from the heart, you will draw it back to the foundation, and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tendency, and between iij is the thread or the cord or the chain, or it is ready to break, there should only be a way of faith and hope through the administration of one of the iii. ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you chop it just short of the root, or if you can't, then probe it gently as a first cure;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and don't go too deep, so you don't chop the root, and let the excretion come out by the voluntary way;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	Then the physician, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	if he is getting better, then remove that covering and clean it up well from its base, or with a cloth or any other instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cut off this hair which is in the wound, as well as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part further from the foundation: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there is no opening of a fistula according to this method; and it is when you plug the tent into the fistula, and it is where it is or from the bottom of the leather on top,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if one takes a tent hole at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour a.i. thread into iij., and plug the tent into the fistula all the way up as much as possible.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it persists in the margin inside, then remove the thread from that hole, so that you plug your two or fundament;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and tie the head to the staff, and join together the .ij. shoulders together, and separate them from each other, and leave it for one day or .ij. days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain it at any time, until the staff touches the shoulders that are between two, and they rub;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound as long as it is forged and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, if you pierce it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too perfectly enclosed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For he is not fit to do this operation if perfect, and then heal, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spikelet from which one makes a tube is sharp, and when cut with an edge it splits in two, and carves;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, not, because one does not fit to do this operation if one is not fit to do it, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Here is the translation of the text:
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	"And when there is one or more, they are far from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are far have little moisture,"
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	"And then cut them with a little yellow water or a little blood, and their color is that of the flesh;"
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	"And the cure for those who have them deep in the foundation is that you command the patient to sweat by applying heat to the feet until the foundation is removed and the fluid comes out;"
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and hold it like a claw, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut off its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligature cannot hold them due to moisture, take it from a scarf, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them with your two hands, then cut them off, and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire's place;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you may cauterize them as it is said or with a cautery paste, then cure them with other cures until they are well;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot be extracted, then cauterize the patient with a hot cautery and sharp so that it washes out what is in the foundation, so that it can be extracted freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Now if the disease is pressing on the patient, and its roots are deeply rooted in the foundation, then the treatment is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should press them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are cured, and do not incise them with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you bring the stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then tie the thread at the top of the needle, and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread over the needle,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is a large one; then pull the thread up, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one.i. to draw out the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation.i. dampen it in oil or wax, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until it is healing, and when it has healed, if he cures with ointment and other cures, until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	on the foundation itself;
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Several times there is drying up of the ends in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you should scrape the bark off a tree or your nail, which does not allow it to moisten;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it as long as it is sore, so that it may be well;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be healed, then shave it more vigorously than before, until it bleeds and is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then treat him until he is well.
dou fremit	he fidgets
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	is a small appearance before the neck, and goes very well with it.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and it never breaks the skin, and you can feel it as if you were dead, and goes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is such that you take a feather from an goose, or a feather from a strong vulture, and put that feather on the wound, until the purple circle completely covers the wound.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the feather as you cover the whole wound, and put it on completely, and scrape the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cut of a feather of air or iron according to this form, and be subtle and draw it across:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, so that you may hold the two together, and press: And if you see, cauterize the wound, as it is before or of the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No clister made of silver or bronze, or of melted gold or brass; and no instrument of any size is appropriate, but only those for which it has been prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These, then, are the ones that are brought for the care of infants and weak or painful things, and are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the clister should be small and large if it is over the breast, or tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and I have a distention where the belly is tied up, so that you see it, and the ribs are pierced on one side, and in the other 1.8;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be massaged with oil of beans or parchment, and be pierced all around the small perforations;
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let there be 1.8 inches of space between each perforation, then insert a strong wire mesh into these perforations and join the belly together as if it were a deer;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies before a strong wire, then cauterize it; and it takes the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil of olive or of almond nut or some other thing, then pour it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then have the ministers spread it on his head with their two hands together until it is completely coated, then remove the cloth, and hold the patient's legs against the wall,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and let the medicine remain on him as long as he can tolerate it; and if he sleeps all night, that is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cauterize him for a disease of the belly that comes on gradually, and let the medicine remain on him until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are at the foundation or abscess, so is the clistere also very small like a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the clistere which is very small where the skin is tightened:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds; now we will tell you about the cures of hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and because of this they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things for which wounds are made are by a blow of stone, and by a sword and knife, or a cock's beak, or a lance or spear or axe or scythe or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made by the blows of a horse's hoof, or of a whip, or of a staff, or of a hammer, or of a mallet, or of a similar object; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar parts;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, since the reminder will come in my chapter on this topic.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs where the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt about the incision of an abscess: if it does not cause great pain to the head immediately after the blood has come from the wound, and it hurts in the opposite direction from the part that was injured;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and the patient's appetite for wine and fatty foods is lost.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not salivate, if his meat is not increased, and he does not drink wine or eat cheese.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and over the wound, if there is an abscess, cotton wet with oil soak up, or wine stiptic;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, if it is fresh all over the body, and does not move with air, powder, which I will say a little hereafter;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has been moved, if it is placed on some onions, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword's edge and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by sutures, if they are joined by stitching, as I will say about wounds from the belly, from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone and dries up quickly, then cure the wound with medicine and restore it with hard leather instead of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large, cooked meats such as testicles and wheat, as well as poultry and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rot on the leather, and it doesn't touch the bone, then cut it all off, and throw it away, and then cure it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and he cannot stop the bleeding with medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it up like a knot.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if he does not benefit from it, then cautery him.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live coal 3 parts, and the powder finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and hold it firmly, until it is well healed and joins together all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then put it well, and leave it not tied up if it does not swell, for we do not remove the medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make a cast of salt when you have the resin or dragon's blood, but let the arm not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arm has moved the wound, nevertheless it is necessary to put on this powder, otherwise
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestives oils or flour of barley made with water and honey, as long as it is still wet;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the doctor prescribes other remedies until he is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound at the throat
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the throat and is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the wound is in the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the neck, if there is no other impediment to the cure, and do not put anything restricting, for this hinders the healing of the neck and makes it retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its extension with the brain, which is the highest limb;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but if the medicine is hot, like warm water mixed with rosewater and oil, and also cooked water;
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of my own according to this way, and wetting oils.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if the cut requires binding, then heal it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and the animal is full of bowels and blood;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, if the fever and the loins and the cauterization are done;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the throat is blocked, so that the food does not go down, and the windpipe is closed,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if the food gets stuck in the throat, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then let it rest for a few days, and then treat it with garlic until it is well;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then examine it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, if you can't bear it all, and what you cannot bear, leave it until the wound pus
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be careful and rigid about the discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder that I mentioned on it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as described in my chapter onchapstick.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or a sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's from a spear or a sword, and the wound is deep, then check the patient's breath to see if they are still alive: know that such a wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if the wound isn't deep and is still fresh, then in the first hour don' t apply powder, nor tie it up so that the patient doesn' t die perfectly:
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and turn to face the patient, and take a breath yourself.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I feel a tingling sensation, and it lies there .ij. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not feel any pain, put in the wound cotton wet with vinegar to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient lie on the wound .ij. times, or .iiij., or more often;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor a strange trembling of the heart due to pain;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good arrangements, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds of tents and other things, as long as he is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and if it bursts, know that there is a fistula; and if the cure is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a knife or a sword, and it is simple, or deep or on the back, if the cure of this one;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not infected, then let the wound rot, and then bring the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	and the rupture of the womb
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and small and little.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from a great wound there often springs none of the intestines, or from the innards, through which enters the efflux of blood;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitch is more painful, and never lessens the small wound than the great one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	For thus do we not put the intestines back in place, if we do not put them back in turn from warm to warm;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	for so that the intestines swell until they feel cold, if return more to the needles,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and so it hurts that the pain is great, and remain so in the needles, for I keep the intestine in its place than others .ij.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the .ij. common sutures have in the suture of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and he sews up the other wounds of the chest and .ij. other common sutures are equal to those of others;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and each is more proper with the sewing of the belly, and I will say each and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and good thing is to treat it, this is by one of the .ij. ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	Here is the translation of the provided text:
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in a certain way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Soak a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water, then wring it out slightly,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Here is the translation of the text:
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine as much as it swells until it is osted;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and no time does this vin restraining, and is muder than a soul for disinfling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with water or salt and cook them well,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for by this the entrance to a little thing is blocked;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then cut a little hole in the wound with the instrument with which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first cure is to moisten it so that it heals;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	so we do not have to cut it unless there is great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for breaking:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut it in the hollow and not on the outside, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines fall out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you reset it according to its natural shape in its own place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can, for this is of great value.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	so that the patient lies on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and sets his legs higher than his head,
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it's in the part of the soul the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if the head and breast are higher than the parts of the soul,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the belly is torn in one of the two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if the part that is torn is higher than the other part,
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so one must treat what I say here about large wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, however, you should
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then take two hands minister pitously that covers all the wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips,
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of sewing.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you must twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave two inches at the head of the wound, and insert a needle with good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two joints of the shoulder with the two joints of the thumb,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who is removing the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the 20 main joints of the hip together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain a double thread through the needle from both sides;
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and assemble the 20 joints of the hip together in the following order;
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leaves .i. two of space, and he sticks another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then lay down the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease to do this according to what you need with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles grow soft, between small and large.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the fine needles will fill all the space, and the very large ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this reason it is necessary that they be soft.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and do not put the needles too far from the hair and leather,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then chop the heads of the nails, so that they do not sting the patient when he sleeps,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or drapes over the heads of the nails to keep them from moving.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it needs a needle or .ij.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and that you join the .ij. stitches of leather and the .ij. stitches of medicine together with a needle with a strong, flexible thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have perceived these things together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if we return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that you thread a needle;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space of a minor two between each stitch the thickness of a minor two;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is for the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed an honourable wound where the belly was hurt.
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was wounded by a knife.
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in length.
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was from the intestines, three or four palms in length.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and this wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought him back his intestine; then it was eight and a quarter hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewed up after three weeks, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the miracol was that he did not die, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not treat it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is no such thing, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and put cotton wool on the wound nine times a day, and rinse it with honey water until it is healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the nine ways to sew up a wound:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and thread it from the outside in.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When she perceived the sting of justice in her right eye, if it is the chief pain or cost that you have pricked with the needle
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and let her pierce from another part on the inside up to that place;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and let her hear this sound of the stitch, so that you also sew as the skin-peeler skins the fur,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the stitch once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of sewing, which Galen explains properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is this; if it is as if there were a single piece of cloth, which joins the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the main pieces to the other main piece in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	take an awl or head of the thread closest to the mirror, and pierce it only once,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the 17. joints of the shoulder
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside further into the flesh,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as 17. joints of the shoulder
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce the other from the outside further into the flesh, in the other 17. joints of the shoulder that are opposite to those already pierced, on the other side of the body;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the mode of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says thus of this word, and no one testifies against it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	you should sew the abdomen with .ij. needles or thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and you must put one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with thread.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the tear is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	then is the stitch more painful than any other type of cut in the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as it is with all other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you find the fresh wound, so that the fire has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and when it has healed over, then put it on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound is not open.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and when you have cooked it, and your hands are warm, and the scent is pleasant.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would with others, until it heals.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicine, put on it, as soon as it begins to go away, cotton wool,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and stir it. ij. times a day until it is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not make communication with the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	If you want to wet another light thing with hot oil, or with rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the thighs, and wipe away the testicles.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	And if he feels pain or swelling in the balls, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If the black wine makes him feel uncomfortable, and sometimes it causes pain up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and piercing within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called “young” cannot heal when it is torn,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is because of the shape of the veins, and because of the subtility of all the body, and the nearness of its nature to that of children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound jumps from the skin, put it back as well as the intestine while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turning towards black, then you should place the joint which is black, so that blood does not come from it.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and then cut who is between the lien;
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the 1/2 joint hanging from the side of the wound to the end in order to extract it when the wound is ready; and the wound above.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore it in some cases,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I have seen some honourable men wounded or stabbed by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and this wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became distended and a fistula developed, and there was discharge and wind.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I knew, and I kept at it until he was well, and I sewed up the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient had ill will in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm done, but delay in better arrangements, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it must be tied in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take strips from large testicles, then seal the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the strips have opened the mouth, so place it on the iij. lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if they pry at their base,
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts off his head, and so it stands that he cannot loosen it,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put on .i. other bandage in this way before, until the wound is completely healed;
et cout la plaie.	and then bind up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If they burn in the intestines, and do not cause any harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this thread of intestine that is still attached,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then lay on top of this string .i. string of flax that is thin and twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then fill the needle with thread, and sew the intestine, and remove it in a cut;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing with thread is only good according to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, most especially when it is in one of the internal grooves, then there is no remedy except for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or which he is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Sache that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is called a "fistula" universally.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most commonly when it has been cut and is healing.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And the fistula is according to the verbal form of the nation, hard and white, and there is no pain felt.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also like the feathers of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	nor once in clear weather, nor another time in thick weather;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	nor once poked, and another time probed;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and it doesn't matter;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is caused by none of the above mentioned things
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	this is to say, due to small blood or fever;
ou por sa malice;	or due to its evil nature;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or due to the heat within, and on the lips, that does not allow them to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much bowels;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the loins are rotten, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where by reason that corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have written extensively on all of these causes and signs, and treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I let you know the cure for fistula, which is carried out by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	I see that the fistula occurs in all limbs of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or the bladder, or the bowel, or some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is any loss to the principle member, and similar movements.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are severe sanitation, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level that I have mentioned, and you have already engaged to cure it,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see a clear fistula, whether it is made of iron or steel, if you seek it out,
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, so the search for a thin probe to poke
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	For the dip [of the probe] will be bent due to the twistiness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula is very twisted and you cannot easily search for it with probes,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	so the cautery [with fire] at one of the openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture is too short a space between one hole and another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then cut it to your power, so that you know if there are any bones or nerves, and then shave it completely,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the location, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Here is the translation of the provided text:
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bones were broken and corroded logs that were within them;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment as long as it is healthy;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and its deep hole is well-centered, if convenient that you cauterize it perfectly, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	and dip them in medicine water, and pour it up to the top of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that is stored at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then dip in olive oil, until it is cured;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not cured by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the nose is corrupted by the fistula, then the cautery.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so long as the corruption is all bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the physician should treat things that are out of place as much as he can make them well;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not well, and rent bow as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	be careful that you have not gone too far yet:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you uncover it and look down as far as you can:
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if he is well here, then it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that corruption is too perfect, so you cannot come there;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other device than to do it by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone putrid, and you can pull it at the claws,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if he is held by an instrument suitable for this.
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if it has one bone, and the tratement of the foot, do not leave any of them;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no mistake or fear;
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if heat and water and wood, and delivers the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that causes pus.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the pus fills between the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then, once the pus has filled the space between the bones,
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you only see as much decay until the blackness is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then mend the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is much decay and comes down to the bone root;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it covers all up to the decay and then mend it until it is solid;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man aged .xx. years who had pain in his leg from an inner cause.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As the matter came to the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no cause to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the mirror due to madness opens so much that it covers the abscesses.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they corrode a lot of matter and become a fistula, and I came so much that all fell off bowels and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many I cured within two years, and there was no cure in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	for as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines that were used to treat it,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and he who runs through the pores with great speed.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red on the youth's body, and had an orange-colored complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent in one of these pores, and then searched all the pores
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that one came together with the other on both sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and I dug into one of the pits as much as I could to uncover a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and broken, and the decay went up to the bone itself;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew that the bone I was holding was rotten, and I made sure that there was no other decay in it, except for that which I had already found;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and I could not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I began, and discovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the continuing corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then I held it, and leaned to mend the break;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not hold it with my hand on one side of the bone, and so I took it all the way down;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	and then I put medicine on it; and he was healed and completely mended,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and do not wish to repeat the work further than for the weakness of the disease, which cannot bear,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For in the work there is often blood evacuation, but he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and gave birth to bone in place of the bone, and was of good disposition and did not cause harm or adversity from all things, nor did it have any bad effects.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if his jaw is broken anywhere near the neck, then it should be done in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take .i. a string, and tighten it at the top of the bone that has opened,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and order anyone that he extends it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and place another string of a larger size on top of the first string and tie it to the joint that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and set the head, so that you take the broken cart to the repairer,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the cart on the ground where you see the rope, so that the rope does not damage the cart;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place .i. log or a tree root underneath to support the cart so that it does not tilt;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and come as often as you can see and feel the corrosion, and come another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if his nose is corrupted, and does not open any more, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then discover the cart all; then put .I. a hot iron,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then silk from one part to the other the corruption, and be the silk sure from the long of the corruption .I. hole, if as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the joint corrupted, and silk the bone or it contains from the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the continuation of the 19 joints, then there is another injury than an ache from copper.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if corruption is where it is poked with the hand, or where it is poked with the foot, then that is very painful.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but above all you must inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not hurt you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and you know that the chisel and the fibers to cover those bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and the shape of the teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each type of work, there is a suitable tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and you know that the work will teach you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you use the instrument for which you are skilled according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	light a fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head should be positioned either towards or away from the fire;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicine, this corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes from death or evil, which is greater, from the fault of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the member becomes black, and seems to be burnt by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness, then goes those correlations of the member from one to another.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and take it all over the body; if you hurry to cover,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if by the percussion of certain poisonous animals, such as
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the head of the two, if it jumps, and does not give it space to come by hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the cupping glass touches the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes up to the arm, so that the cupping glass touches the neck; and if it passes over the neck, then it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and do not wait for the quantity of its virtue
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and if it comes up to the first joint, so that the cupping glass touches the second joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to earth, so cover all the earth.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, so cover at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other injury but to make the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or sew the member so that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister one of the lines down, and another minister the other line up,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you remove the chaps between the 17th and 20th lines to a large 1st stake, as long as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the cap or silk, and place a lin cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the shoulder;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring the other injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood loss occurs when you work, let the area be cauterized thoroughly.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or if there are any powders that restrain it, then return to your medicine until it is finished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then bandage the member with a convenient ligature and treat it until it is well.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	And I will tell you that he came to Earth in the body of a man:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	He had a blackness which seemed like fire burned him.
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first in his two feet, as much as it stained all of the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he took off the copper from the foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after that the corruption returned to his two hands, and came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and to me he sits on things that reflect after purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he ordered me to cut his hand, and I do not know how to hope that matter will reflect again;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he might die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the power of man is feeble; and he was despairing, and returned to his land;
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and wrap his hand with copper, and he was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I do not know but that for this reason only that someone else does something, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No time comes when the flesh is cut open, and remains so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then rot and pierce, and in the process the bowels jump out, and remain so long that our vassals;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the leather which is above it is also very soft like.i. drapelets deliquescent,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not corrode as far as the bone, nor as far as the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and cook it so you chop all of the leather, and most importantly when it is thin, as well as our blankets;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not start for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have promised that the leather will be dried, and the corrosion is not yet complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the leather is tough like horsehide, so cook it with this mixture:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Look if her breasts are large, and the breast that gives milk has a putrid odor.
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Therefore, the medicine made in Egypt, which is thus prepared:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take likewise, and oil, and lead-ore, equally, and put to cook in .i. vessel on the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and the make it in water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in cauterizing the chest, and extract the perforation;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this mutch times, until the breasts are white, and the milk is stopped;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never is it clisted with water from ash,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from vine wood and pour water over them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour it out, and clisten it, until you know the sinews are well-clisted;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes will help him.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the cauterization is with water and honey where there is a little bit of lead powder crushed.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you the cauterization with honey and wine honeyed, that honey has property of purifying and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine brings the blood to its place.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have promised that the breast is well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the cauterization of a woman who has given birth to a horse in her womb
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you squeeze it with oil and rose water and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cauterize it with certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the chapter on the treatment of herbs.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if it is small, and the cauterization wound is small, the cauldron cannot enter.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if the expansion of a iron a little, and put in a tent of the Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Basilicon ointment, as it is expanded;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so that the ointment can enter easily:
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is pierced: let the cup or bowl be above, so that it is lower than the wound.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is drawn to its full extent, if it does not slip.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the loins with your hands as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	then appear in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest level it can reach,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is drawn to its full extent, if it does not slip.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast with a cloth as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bow doesn't fall off to one side: let the bow hang loosely forward, and don't tie anything to it.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medications to put on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are placed over a linen drape that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	Then cut off as much of the breast as possible from the pit. That is, cut more away from the first than from the second.
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then place a wound dressing above it. That is, another bandage according to the quantity of the breast pit,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it over the breast pit to adjust the bow. And do not remove the large bandage for more than a day or two;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and the one on top of the breast pit, remove often to remove the bandage;
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or not enough or digested or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when this medicine has spread somewhat in the pit of the chest and you see the nature that comes out on the surface,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast is already sore, and bring the salve;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then let it down in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if change .i. other drape, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes upset after many days, knowing that the breast does not hurt.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poison enters after a long time, if it does not make you despair of your health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the sake of health. For there are men who delay healing by running into their wounds, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and they become indigent and weak after many days, knowing that their liver does not get better.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if their liver is delayed in healing and becomes inflamed, then take the following medicine: mix wet substances with moisture and dry them with virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as an antidote it finishes, for there is much vitriol, and that is the second medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a small piece of yellow brass, and form it with oil of roses, and rise it with equal old wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then put it on and use it; and this same, once made into honey, cook it thicker,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when the finity of oil is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it over honey when it is taken off the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in glue .i. drape, and put it over the chest, and once i administer on arista long,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like wheat flour and hundredweight;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder of them, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and this cure is long, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Then you will know that corruption is complete, and it affects the bone, or hard members, or limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if one practices the cure for a fistula, as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail bed of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is an abscess that forms at the base of the finger nails on the palms of the hands
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Here is the translation of the text:
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when he has been wounded, and no attention is taken, then
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and grind so that it cuts the root of the nail, and by chance cuts all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion up to the bone, until there is a stinking pain, and the two cheeks are wide apart, and the color flees.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the chapter on treatment, and the cure does not benefit.
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary that you cut off all the excess which has been retained by the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the finger pushes down on the flesh, and begins to prick, and bleeds.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	if you put the rag on top of the finger that pricks the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and pour a little fire onto it, and hold it carefully and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining flesh some fiery and corrosive medicine to destroy everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the healer apply garlic poultices until he is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	If the corrosion is in the bone, then let him be cut and treated with fire, for as long as the bone is corroded, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	And if you see the corruption of the flesh, then cut it off with a sharp blade, as it is said before:
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then let the healer apply garlic poultices until he is well.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and bruised, and it smells of great pain, then you must first heal it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut off the nail from the spur with a saw across it;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the saw does not come too close to the nailbed, because the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is something, put something on it to ease it;
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the palm of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two joints that may break in the hands of some men are both bone and flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by accident they may break or dislocate, but never have any fingers,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and in neither of the two do the roots of the joints arise, or their birth is in either of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Whoever is born with two testicles does not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and whoever is born with the testicles joined together may move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of whoever is chubby so is light in some way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size the in its root from a wide spathule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born with a joint root are difficult to treat; if you hold them down with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who are born or are wounded in the derriè, it is necessary that you first chop the flesh roundly up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, cut the bone with a suitable chisel and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The limbs that come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you think you can take this sulfur, so that it is repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two blankets or sheets wet with oil, so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin sheets of leather, until the leathers are stuck together, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The sulfur must be taken so that it is repaired according to its natural forms;
Des vils	Of the vile things
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Are those that are full of excess melancholy, which come from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more are found in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, while others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not administer any purging of the colon, and then the healthy one from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure for fever is according to .ij. ways: one is that of the cupping, and force the black blood out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way if you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size should be according to this method: raise the first leg with hot water very strongly, until the big vein is visible,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	and then strain the leg of the sick person from above the hip all the way down to the knee.
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein at one inch, or two, or three, of a large size.
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then slice and draw forth the black blood from your hand, from one wrist to the other, as much as the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it off, and instruct him to dye his meat with black coal;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and then begin the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are clean, and tie on the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	"Then dip it or bathe it, and let it dry: remove the leg from the hot water until it turns red, and inflame the veins;"
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	"If you do not have a bath, then heat it by the fire, and then rub the vein at the top of the thigh, or in the region of the ankle bone;"
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	"Then soak the skin with oil, and peel off the vein from each part, until it is completely exposed, so that one can feel it;"
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it is red and black when it enters or leather so too as a white rope;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pour the oil out so that it is elevated from the leather, and then put on the knife lightly,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then take another piece of oil on top of it, two feet away; then scrape the leather along the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then let it hang by its thread, as you did before, and put on another knife, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	and take another height, or more than you need then reduce it, and cut at both ends of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	and then cut and trim down to the second height; then remove it from height to height until it is completely done, and then cut;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot raise and stretch it, then take a very strong and sharp needle,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and cut and trim it, and wrap it with thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is done;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and let it not break, because if it breaks, we cannot pull or lift it, and this is harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished treating it, put wet wool in wine and oil over the wound and bandage it; and heal it until it is well.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and is not straightened, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then you must split it open, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron from which one makes a weapon if it is curved, and does not cut anything except that it cuts the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is a thick curve, because if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and it may happen elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the poultice that comes off the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	if it enters the body coiling and going down, prevent between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this illness are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then change the legs, and begins the illness to come out, also like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, if it is convenient that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one third to almost two thirds, and tie it off,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth hanging down at the leg, and as often as it comes off, if the wrap around the cloth and the tie
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, if you take a part of it, and wrap around the remainder, and do not cover all the way up to its root, until it is all wrapped up;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	because if you cut it, if it enters into the pit, and brings about pus and rot, or bad disease there;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the neck, and nothing remains or cors.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and never once has this happened when she was treated with long palms, or with .x.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and some of them came to me, who was treated with long palms, and when you cut them, if they are a little raised or dented, and pierce them only up to the root,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	then let it be empty; and the matter that is within, and bring medicines to the place of corruption every day, then treat it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never cut at the vein with a knife; leastwise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot is.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and that it may not break through and hurt him, then heal it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that come between the hide and the cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	is called in our land "buff disease", because it often occurs in buffaloes
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm which is born between the hide and the skin, and goes all over the body ascending and descending.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and he smells badly from member to member as far as he rips the hide where he went, and jumps far.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is infected with some humor, so that it comes towards and crawls and wriggles and worms or scabies.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	By chance, it enters and destroys the oil; and such a thing often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him curable and extractable, so you can only do it when he goes.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So it is necessary that you lay him down on a firm bed tightly tied up,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then put a glass of wine in his mouth, and let him drink; and put the little dagger in his hand,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the fire cautery, as long as it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm that it does, if it correts the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see coming to the head near the oil, then hold it fast with the hand; then lift it up and throw it away;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and use the medicine to dissolve the pains of evil spirits with soluble medicines for evil spirits;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and to prevent meat from putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vaporization" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it spreads from member to member; and I saw the one I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to see a sick woman, and I discovered a small swelling on her arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and then, I saw it rise up like a worm in the shoulder;
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	so quickly that it seemed alive, and as if it were silver when it cut from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left the body, and settled in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it corrode all over the body until it reaches the other side;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that she twisted around again inside the body, as I saw it myself.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how much she moved from one member to another, for I had never seen such a disease move in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I know of many who have suffered from this illness, and they often experience pain that moves from one part to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I don't want to, if I saw it on a woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that was because the woman's body was dry and the veins were exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason it appears that she has wind or gas in her bowels.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and does not appear to those who are delicious and have moist bodies and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you have healed this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the ligature above and remove them properly, and then cut off so much as it feels constrained to its place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see blood,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure of those who cause wind, like pills of putrid wine, and pills of horse chestnut, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the direction of their flight.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of arrows is such that there are some with large tips, and others with small, and some with hooks, and some riveted.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with .ij. points, and those with tongues, and those with pieces of wood attached;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and the one who bites in any member so bite according to .ij. manners: or in member principle hair bit,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she bites therefore in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after many preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not perfectly extracted, if you pull it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	and the sign of the skull when the arrow enters and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when paralysis and weakness and twitching and redness in the eyes, and cramp and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is lost from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and springing out of the moist wound, white, resembling pulses, and jumping also like burned hay;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign will announce to you, if you continue with the treatment, and treat the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it bites or curls, is that it is near the left breast, and also because it seems to be stuck in something hard, not in something hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and if by chance the arrow sounds like pulses, and in black blood, and cold comes and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And so there is doubt of death.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow is that it does not hurt in the place of pain, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he sighs and shudders with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters in the shell of the chest, then the small ribs ache; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the members move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters in the stomach, perhaps there is food that does not digest.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters the belly, and does not go through the intestine's passage, there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, and the urine flows out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the aid and the spine and the force and the hips and the legs, and the limb resembling, are safe according to multiple provisions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not cause pain, listen to what I will tell you, for if you do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There was a man who had an arrow lodged in his throat at the root of his neck.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and pulled the fat from the ear on another side, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I tried an arrow, which went into his oil of the ear, pulling out paper from his tongue.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was withdrawn, and I only felt the tip go towards his fist.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and was this arrow of a turquoise color, so that it would pass through the ears without causing any harm; and there were no bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And shot an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and was this Arabic arrow to the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I aimed at the beard, and made a subtle shot, and I hit the Christian:
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And shot an arrow to a man, which was either at the head or in the belly, and thought he was dead;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then let it pass .xxx. days, if not its disposition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut the arrowhead, and sharpened it, and inserted it, and didn't have a bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a bird with an arrow in its throat or back, and the wound is well healed;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and let the arrowhead stay inside it, and don't change its natural position;
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	There is no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, to whom an arrow hit in the face, and was sore wounded;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And he remained there suffering great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And throw an arrow at the king of the princes, who was shot through the neck,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was a little sagging on the right side; and the arrow was all re-sheathed
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the cure after she had been lame for three days. There was a very narrow wound.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I treated her with a subtle poultice, and I did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt pain and a headache on the right side.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought this was of the point of an arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on top of him a plastron made of resinous and digestive substances, so that his limbs do not inflame.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the point of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the resinous plaster every day, and quickly healed the wound, and delayed the recovery of the patient for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	As long as he felt the arrow .i. during his life; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied to the wound a corrosive agile medicine by hands, as long as it was open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tested it, and felt the arrow's head which had become stuck;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied to the wound by that agile medicine, as long as the arrow's head was clearly visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and pass well the boundaries within .iiij. months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then he healed if the wound that I put the nails, and the meat on both sides and can't come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I ceased from subtility and invention of means for instruments, until I took .i. day to make nails well;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to him whose form will come at the end of this chapter of chalk, until I tra' it, and restore the wound;
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And I see young people whose cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and it was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or have you said the quality of extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your care on what I do not say, for the book cannot include everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	But the wise masters compare only a little bit of salt, and on what is present and failing.
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Truly nine ovre and nine instruments are necessary for the dismemberment of strange things which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows should not be shot from the members unless they are prepared according to the nine ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and those that leap forth from there where they enter, it is arrows entering into their flesh, and do not leap at all now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not leap now, let it remain as the flesh decays within, and let the exit be closed.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let it remain so for some days, and change the wound every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it leaps, and if it does not leap, if there is any pain within, let the flesh be stretched out, and then cut off.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow has gone through the bone of the skull, and goes down to one of the chambers of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: if you do not draw it out, but leave it as long as it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow comes only to the sinews, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow has gone through only part of the bone, and does not go any further than the sinews,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and let the patient remain for some days without any bad accident if the machine of pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she is so torn that she cannot come out, then administer tarred thread, as I told you; then treat the joint as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the chest if we cannot see it, and we seek it with all our might;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, and treat it with appropriate tools;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by stretching the wound, and by the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	or there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein, so that the wound is great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and if you can extract the arrow, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	so that the bone is broken on either side where the arrow goes in, which you can feel,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can draw it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, that you pull it more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, so that the ear of the arrow is completely cut off, then pull it, because extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain of extraction makes you uncomfortable, so bring the following that we have said about the cure in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard against the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put no comment that you may draw out the arrow without danger,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or red-hot or fiery-hot or firmly or loudly; and set the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow hit him,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then follow what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, which opens nothing, or whose skin is swollen in a particular place, so that it can be seen or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	So cut it off above, until the scissors can take hold, and then remove it: if you wait any longer.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is held in the bone, turn your hand in a circle until it enters the bone and expands it, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	If it cannot be removed, let it go for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is the arrow that is stuck, pull it out with all your might;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he is cut, and you see to administer poultices, if he administers them. I.e. an instrument sharpens,
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow goes into the hair of the instrument; and then pour out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is cut, pour out the instrument with a point entering in, to cheer the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow touches, so that you cut all the skin around where the venom is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	and then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if an arrow is caught in the breast or in the belly or in the bladder or on the side, and it is nearby, then you may cover it up with a cloth, if you can.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, for that is the task.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the clamps used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and it should be like this:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do this: large, small, and medium-sized, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the claw that catches the arrow is also like the beak of an owl,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for the tip of the arrow, as this is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the claw for holding and for keeping safe this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	the veins of the neck common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which one is healed are .xxxi., because it has head xvi.,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is what the text says about the veins of the neck: "It is known as the 'herbech', which means two veins that run behind the ears."
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the 18 arteries which are in the 2 temples.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the 18 veins that are in the 2 arms of the two hands, which are called "aspires".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the 18 veins which are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the .ij. veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the .ij. veins that are on the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly talked about are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the one is the cerebral, and it is on the left side of the neck, and it is called by the lay people "voinne du chef";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and its name is called 'fast', and it is composed of the cephalic and basal.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it 'vein of the neck'; and the basilical if it is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it 'vein of the abdomen', and it is on the light side.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and this is the one that is opened, which is clearly visible above the breastbone.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little finger is the vein between the thumb and the index finger, and if it is at .ij. rain;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	And in the leg and where the foot are .iij. veins: one is dislocated from the socket of the left shin,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second that is in the ankle of the right leg; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other leg;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	And in the other leg are 3 veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The headache from the veins behind the ears is helped by the catarrh of the ancient and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the headache, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the illness.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are with an asperous cloth; then tie the patient's neck with a rope,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Keep your hands on either side of your neck, and when you feel the pulse on one side, mark it with your finger.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the scalpel, and pierce through the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand up to the whole vein upstream.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and clean the meat and the vein thoroughly. Cut two times, and make sure there is no blood left.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then stretch and tie it, until it is healthy again.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have said above the incision and the fire cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The sine of the .ij. arteries that are in the .ij. temples, if it is an old migraine,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and sodom and eyes used to water, and to the eyes' tears;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the sight is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient draws out his neck, as long as the .ij. veins appear open.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and send blood to the two hands, and then sign of pain in the face;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift up the cup to your two hands, and then sign of pain on the top of the index finger, and pour the blood away from the cup,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift up the cup, and the cloth, as you have done in the .ij. other veins, and make the blood run according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then unclothe the patient, and set your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then make the form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their grafting and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The relief from a vein in the forehead is as good as that from a headache of old age, and from migraine, and from jaundice;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient's neck twists when extracting it, so that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the tip on the vein, and hold it with your hand or something else, and let out as much blood as you see fit;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then cut the neck of the patient, and tie the vein so that it is clean and never again does a wide flame occur.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein should be cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame might break when it is thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The first sentence to translate:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is that the patient should break his neck with no rope, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	and then the doctor, and be careful when handling him, a little of the long flame, a little wide, for there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, in case of a break; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then put it on cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The wound of the vein is so hot that it causes burning, and it also causes fever and facial diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as headaches and redness that come on in the face, and even when they are old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the wound is such that the patient hurts his neck, then he holds his baby with his left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a long, flexible flame, and burn it between the two nostrils;
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well and now the blood will begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not cut too deeply either, and make the blood flow according to your need, then let it rest for one night, for it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The five kinds of wounds: the first, second, third, and fourth degrees of injury from cutting, burning, and scratching, and many diseases, and inflammation, and ulcers, and gangrene.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of health is such that the patient pulls his hair out from one side and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and so the master standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient cuts with .i. scythe
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the long vein slightly, then treat the wound quickly, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do the same on the other side, then hold the ligature, and tighten the ligature slightly,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	to strangle the sick person; and leave it until morning, so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	of the healing of the skin
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	the healing of the veins in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and the splits in the lips, and the neck and throat.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	and the qualities of the healing: to make the sick person sit before you, and to hold their neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	and turn the lip, and look at 1 . 2 veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and know them by this that they are black, and by this that there are small veins black around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So therefore know them both, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So therefore take the larger of the two, and also do the same for the 1 2 veins that are above and below, because this is a similar way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Of the health of the tongue: that is to say, after the treatment for headaches, which are caused by the opening of the veins in the head, and it concerns the extraction from the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healer is that the patient swallows between your hands before the sun, and he makes the tongue relax, and looks carefully at each side of a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So heal them both, and do not become too perfect, for soon the veins will be cut.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	Veins which are commonly treated are done according to .i. two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with fire a little flame sharp, or olive oil subtle as for cut-coves, and is called "aneasil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are large and subtle according to the largeness and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire sharp is so called, and is large as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is a good work to open the veins of the head which are flat and full of big blood and tumult.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle in point, and it is to save the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The salve of the temple, which is one of these veins, helps against diseases that are in the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is fitting for the surgeon to cut away the blood, and to bind up the wound, and not to be afraid of the artery which is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he stops the artery, and blood flows from it, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be struck with fire, but cut off as I said.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary to stretch it out, and change one another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and wrap the fire in silk, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you are able to recognize the place of the injury, so that you can draw out the arm, and touch the place while recognizing the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the location of the injury, then lay the arm down, and wrap the wound in fire silk.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and guard against injuring in the artery when you see the edge broken, for it is from the artery: avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	and if you see coming up above as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	so hasten then, and put your hand on it with your palm up, and then open your hand so that the blood does not run; for it often happens:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	take hold of his arm, and let it be, and do not move the patient; and be in fear, and do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it does not stop, it will come to you, and the medicine is not given to you, because the chief of the retentives stops it; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fir tree bark, and make it, and take one of its halves and tie it well until the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, apply the powder that stops blood, as we have said;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stopping of the blood is not due to many disorders because of the small size of the wound and the pulse of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The patient should go to the doctor mid-way through the vein, and from the heart's base.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	For it is composed of the basal and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the doctor should wrap it tightly around the nerve that is exposed, and if he cuts too much, the nerve will burst;
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells up and the patient's legs become gray, and perhaps it cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, it is necessary that you heal the nerve from the instrument anaesthetized; and avoid the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the .i.. nerves, let it be cut short.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the head when helped, that it pulls blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to heal by touching the olive flame or the pine tree flame, because it is the one that saves all veins, because it does not burn the nerve or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	All the same, one must seek out the lighter case and not grieve over it if one makes a mistake the first time, and start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And so that the joints of the shoulders do not swell for some men if one makes a mistake the first time, but it is not necessary to grieve.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health so much depends on your belief.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about a doctor, if is that medicine is only to be used to maintain health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to ward off future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the doctor should make one of the three incisions that are on the head: that is to say, cephalic, temporal, and basal;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the doctor should make one of these three incisions when the patient has just eaten, in autumn and winter after eating, as soon as the sign of satiety appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and the doctor should make one of these three incisions the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The health of a person who has recovered from disease is not determined by the time of day or season; but rather, it is in all hours and times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it does not suit to cure children until they are .xxiii years old, nor women but four months after childbearing until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	It does not suit to cure the old who have passed .lx. years, for they should be left alone.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when any person is cured, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that he take a light enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is still some food in his mouth, so that the veins do not draw the excessive fluids that are harmful to the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	do not heal those who are too sore from meat, nor those who are drunk, as much as they need to be healed, nor those who drop their fluids.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if he is not healing after a feverish passion, and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and multiple trips to the bathroom, and sleeping and fasting, and whatever else impedes him.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly adjust the humors, if he is overweight, through meat, drinking, and medicine, if you have it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	and then enter the bath, if nothing is harmful to him, because it weakens the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal from the wound at the back of the neck by the third day, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect him on days of work, and from hunger, and from lust, and from similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be lying and jointed, and let the healer be higher than he who is healed, and wash his arms.11 times or 13 times,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then remove the ligature with care, for when it is too tight or too loose, he cannot run without it.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	and then dip the wound in a small cup of old oil, and then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not run and does not bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run out like strings from the body, and if they are of such a nature that they are prone to windiness,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one applies fire to them, if one takes it away, the vein cannot be opened, and so they are of this kind;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, if it is too narrow, for one thing, so that the blood flows out, and also
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if one begins again a little more slightly or on an ambulance, if the veins are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if it swells up, and the patient hopes, let him lie one or two days, and bind not his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	For in case there come abscesses; do not enter a bath, but begin again the treatment if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the fracture is small, or the joint is slightly dislocated, and you doubt whether it will move as much as you see, so that the fire may be applied to all the fracture without pain;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and make a small wound, so that the swelling is less when the wound is made; for this often occurs, when the wound is small:
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound open, then do not recommend the use of salt, and put a little oil on it, because it dries up the blood in this place where the oil is placed.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and so administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and so it makes a triple and bowing sound when you put it on the wound; if it is too thick, it makes a subtle sound and splits when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there is a large abscess, which often comes when the opening of the vein is small, then it must be done;
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hurry, put on the shoulder a wet sponge in water and in hemp a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flowing from a vein, and if it remains in place for several days without any black or green, so no harm to it;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on anything of aloe or myrrh made up of juice of calamus, monkshood, or something like it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often the appendix and the appearance towards the side of the base: put your hand there, and if you feel the soft spot under pressure from your hand, that is the appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So then you must not put anything on any of what we have said, for by chance in the heart without the artery; but make it .i. plaster dry so that it hardens the place, and then heal it with other cures until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it stay until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are healthy and have the need to extract blood, let them make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal them little by little, and one should heal them by cutting across, not by piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of healing is preserved from the decay of blood and the hurting of nerves, and it is better than the long surgery does not do wide cuts.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to him whose course needs surgery, it is necessary to give moist wine in grape juice; if he is heated, if he has a fever, drink three times or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of cold complexions, if he drinks moist wine before the surgery in musk syrup, or honey syrup with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he sweats to sickness, after the flow of blood, it is convenient that he hums brew of car, and syrupy scent.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use of other things which we have said in the chapter or paste for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up a arm, and sweats sometimes, if it is convenient, when he is weakened by great sickness, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue which continues continually.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he vomits up an arm after the first sickness, and he has a strong body, if he heals in 6 hours after the first sickness, or in 7 hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who must be healed from another side, if he must be healed on the second day or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has blood flowing inside his body which is heated up and causes fever. If this happens, a large amount must be extracted, and the opening made so wide that it can pass through with ease.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	and then you must perform all the conditions for healing, and put your hand on his pulse as he heals, so that death does not come from pain.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when healing is neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see the dislocation of the arm, and make it come out again without the second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firmly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is curved, that he extends the arm carefully, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it rest until the second time it is well; or you put to it at the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that has been frozen by the opening flows again;
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on .I. piece of silk, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has escaped, leave it and do not tighten it, as long as the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if need be to drain the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is called the "chief vein," and it should not be punctured for drainage.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of the drain is that the patient dips his hand in warm water, so that the feverish color disappears.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	And so let it move gently, so that the vein appears clearly, then he keeps it now from top to bottom, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and be careful not to hurt the joint of the hand, and don't let it get wet, put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it's cold, don't put the hand in warm water, because we put it more in summer than in winter;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The salve of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is its method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Exhaust the hand, and dip it in warm water until the vein has disappeared, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And bend it across, and cut it all over, if it doesn't harm anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	And don't cut too deep, for the nerve are all exposed from the core;
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put hand in warm water, he is still frozen in the wound, and can not pull it out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if put on the vein oil and thread to sew it tightly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The surgeon must remove the disease from the patient's left hand, and do everything as I have told you before the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	And the surgeon must remove all diseases that are below the belt,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	If it is a disease of the hips, and retention of flowers, and a disease of the kidneys, and of the feet and legs old, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is that the patient should drink some hot water, and rub the vein until it stops.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the joint at the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cure it on the stone, be careful of the knots that are loose, and cure it by traversing as when digging; and let the fire burn away.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound cannot be drained, put the stone in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it is cured the first time, start the second time above a little hole, because the leech is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the strength, as we have said, and make the same treatment with the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint, and its pain reaches the knee, when it is due to injury.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of this pain is such that the patient enters or leaves by the foot, and it is pulled out from under the ankle. If there is twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the nerve does not open; and if it opens, so that you can feel it with your fingers in all directions, and going across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it makes a sound when you touch it, for the leg is exposed, and it is very soft to the touch.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't treat it, so that there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nails;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and do so much damage to the leg that you can see it, then cut the ligature, and place cotton and hold it; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Sores from suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or glass, or quartz; and the suction is made in one of two ways: either by wounding and drawing out blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation which is not to hurt if it is according to .ij. manners: or she is all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation that is made by hurting and by extraction of blood if it is made in .xiiij. degrees of the heart,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	from which one is all in sum the chief; and others is in mid the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and .ij. others in .ij. costois du cou; et le ventouse desoez le menton;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cups of the shoulders; and the suction cup over the collarbones;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the suction cups around the biceps; and the suction cups around the thighs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction cups around the ankles; and the suction cup does not treat blood flow, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the body;
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason do not block it completely, as is done with vein surgery;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that she be amenable, nor that there be any fire or heat, in any disease that comes from overfullness, until the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if for a necessity of diseases it is necessary to ventilate, or by customs, let us amenable each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and emit and in every season;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have the need to ventilate, become much heavier;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who, when they truevent, come from repletion and pain in their face, and in their head, and darkness of eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouth, and have fled the tongue, and thirst for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such people, and see no blood and vomit and die and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is half past midnight, we command them to fast for 2 hours that day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saint of the muse helps with grief in the heart ... but it is not until all blood has been evacuated from the body that he comes to the aid of those who are grieved.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation if it is in the place of the health of the cerebral,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not suffice that he who is of a cold complex use this, or who has a fever, because this does him much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this purpose neither the old nor those who have cold diseases should use it,
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who is often treated with this, if he becomes dizzy, and for this reason one should place the cautery a little more down by the doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The ventilation of the neck is in place at the base of the skull and the basilica, and for this reason it goes to the extraction of the foot.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and with a cut of the channel of the palm, and all, and repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to press down, because if it holds too tightly, then in the stomach or the heart or the chest.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventilation of the neck is in place at the base of the skull and the basilica, and for this reason it goes to the extraction of the foot.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and is in the place of the sanctity of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command to the saint that he express his hand at the putting on, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not take away blood with a wound.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds of the mouth bring to disease of the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases which are in the mouth; and is at the place of the sanctities of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds of the shoulders bring to disease that comes from heat and filling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The winds of the collar bring as much as the three veins of the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For she draws out blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for his veins are naked and can be easily cut through, and know how to tie off arteries and veins.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the back is suitable for sucking out the foundation blood, and the pus from the abscesses, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large and made of leather, so that it has the ability to well suck; and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break, and would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs open widely, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are suitable for the old pains of the knees, and of the ankles, and of the bladder, and turn back the flowers; and they are in place of the 12th bone, and of the 12th joint, and moreover they weaken the body greatly after a long time, and bring about premature death in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation of the provided Old French text into English:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is thick, then you must hurt it once with a sharp instrument; the first time to cut through the thick vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick, then you must hurt it a third time; and when we want to squeeze the blood out little by little, then we must press hard once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And when we want to squeeze the blood out little by little, then we must press often; and if it is thick, then we must firmly press until the veins burst suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and to those who have thick leather and tough skin, that you anoint the joints of the suction cups with oil which opens and dissolves.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in a state of stiffness, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a state of tension, of nettle oil, or of lily oil, or of chamomile, or other similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of myrrh, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if someone has a tender back and large pores, it is not appropriate to put any oil on it,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is appropriate to wash after the wind has passed with rose water, or cold water, or water from a mulberry tree, or water from a cucumber, or porcelain water, or other similar water.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if one has moisture due to sweat, if it rises thus, or with water from mistletoe, and sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And if one has excessive fluids, they rise from old wine, or water from fennel, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not appropriate to use a suction cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or .ij.; and do not sleep after the suction.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is appropriate that he warm up, when he should be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And warn if the one who is being treated is coleric, and if his skin is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is appropriate that he drink cold things, like grapes, endive, lettuce, and sage, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and mint juice, and cheese curds, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cool complexion, if they drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and mint juice, and mint curds and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and let him drink as much as he can when the wind blows, for he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is appropriate to give some people triple or musk-flavored food before or after exposure to the wind, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be careful with the sun, but it only works if you're hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leeches that are used to hurt are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and podagra, and the belly, and the bowels, and the anus, for this member does not suffer to be hurt on the skin.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and one does it only to draw blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we do when we put leeches on the breast when there is no pain; by removing the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and the bowels to weaken the member,
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and bone the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if bone by its own power attracts the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and so it is done when you put it on the liver and on the stomach when there is wind repressed,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are emptied only to suck up; and never are they emptied together fire, and never is plain water drawn,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as if for the diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that the suction cup is filled with hot water, or with water in which herbs have been boiled suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup is made from this:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has .ij. two inches in diameter and a palm's width across the top, and it has an orifice at the center about as wide as a pin, just as to pass through a needle
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be of brass, smooth before so that it does not bruise the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and has in the center a crossbar of brass or iron, to hold a candlestick
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and may they be great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the sucks of children are other than those of old men, and leaner than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And this suck must be put on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candlewax or liniment, and place it between the thumb and finger at the top of the thumb, which is placed between the thumb and finger,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	So that the clarity is at the bottom of the vacuum so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the member, and your two are on the hole that we have said, so that when you press, if there is steam, and then take off the vacuum;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the lining as before, and recommence it often, if you need to do so.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the vacuum that has been prepared for pleurisy, there is no verge or pit, and it is only prepared when it is plain of water, and is placed on the member as little as possible;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	are not adjusted except in limbs where it is impossible to put a suction cup due to their smallness, as in the case of lips and gums, and similar things;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the case of naked limbs of horses, as in the case of two or three-year-old horses, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find suction cups that are in smooth, clear waters without danger, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a nut in the water until they are familiar with it, and do not have anything in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then rub the member until it is red, and put on the poultices.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are healed and have become strong, one can then use a blister, for it is useful after that.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the member thus, and then dip it in water well, and then squeeze it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if it is left too long after the heart of the body, so wet .i. linen cloth in cold water and put on, until the heart has dried up;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if it increases, so put on vitriolic paste or gangrene and similar things until it has dried up;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the middle of peas peeled, and let them burn at the fire for now they will dry up;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more work, then take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the sutures do not want to take hold, then rub the site of the cut with fresh blood or stick an needle in it as long as there is no blood.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they start to burn;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are crying, then powder a little aloe and wormwood, or ash, so they will stop crying now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the beginning of the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapter on cauterization is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is used for restoring breaks and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, o son of a scholar, that the wise men poured this chapter on cauterization upon you, that you have never read such in any of the old books, nor have you ever read a letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good book about it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it, except by the science of the ancient books, from which I have studied and practiced the art, and through experience, and through the customs of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have condensed it at the end, and have clearly depicted the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these twenty-nine chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sum of words and chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when there is a break, dislocation, twisting, or distortion in someone, it is necessary for you to hurry to save the patient from pain on both sides, if anything does not prevent him from walking, as weakness of the spine, or infirmity, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if his legs are too tight or too loose; and he should not eat cold dishes, nor drink wine, nor eat any greasy foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the appendix, nor about the expansion of matter in the member; if the patient returns to his usual governance that he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meat that heals well, or has viscosity like cooked bread, and rice, and peas, and pies made from cheese, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with good nutrition, the break will heal faster and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken nose of old or weak people cannot heal or harden the members well according to their nature, nor those that are too tender, as is the case with the nose of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but has no cure, reset the broken bones. i. large and thick meat that hardens and joins the member together, as much as it can; and does not leave it all to heal itself, and because it is necessary to feed it with large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes up, and another that goes down, as when one cuts with an awl, so that the wood is split.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that makes a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And at each manner has its own engine, and its own instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is done by the break of the bone by what the line is twisted, and open well from behind, and some to the presser of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twists ne are on the toe, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can have twists, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put medicines upon it that come hereafter, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that comes in the arm, and are the three parts separated, it is now necessary to put them together evenly, so that the knots come first.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and let the knots be calm, if you do not move for a day, as long as the knots are calm.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it evenly with a tool that you can use easily and carefully, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then restrain it, as it is necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if it is the hand or foot or a small member of the limb or two strings, or a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you remove by all means the additions in their places at the end of the operation so that your work does not cause the patient pain or injury;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and carefully set the two shoulder joints according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the joint is set firmly, and do not tie it too much, do not press it as those who make it come from their work of cauterizing hot and contracting at the member, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are fixed, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither when he is awake nor when he is asleep, nor when he turns over, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, then it is safe, and it is necessary to put the limb in a position where it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and guard well that it is put correctly, so that no twist comes when it is reset;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I know that broken members are diverse in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as bras and doi and others: it is convenient to wrap with linen cloth soft and fine;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are thick, such as thigh and leg: it is convenient to wrap with a wide and strong linen cloth, for the wide linen cloth embraces all of the large member, and holds it evenly from all sides, so that there is no taste;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then he steps back a little, .iij. times or iiij. according to the member, and holds your hand slightly away from the limb, then goes up over the break and holds it less, so that the break then moves slightly apart from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the limb a little and a little, until you press hard on the sound part, then take .i. other limb and turn again very much over the sound spot;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then go back to the sound part of the break and hold it gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first step above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the linen or drapes threads so that they are all the same length, then lay them all over .i. bend, and then put your well-made stirrups on; if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or boil, put on it a cold poultice and let it stand for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then extract them from the elbows, and let them be half a handbreadth wide, or a fist made of wood or palm leaves, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the bone that one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also as long as necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	and hold them on the splints also as you did with the first, then tie above it a thread in advance, as in the first with the blade.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and then tighten it more than before, less; and it is necessary that the thread be not too thin, not too thick nor too narrow, and it is made of linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the thread is thick, like those I have seen made for the ropes of the lances which are twisted linen, and this is a great mistake, because the lances cannot be equal if they are too thin, and it is necessary that there be between each splint at least two inches of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded between the splints after the tightening of the ligaments, then he sews them with linen thread or a cotton cloth so that he does not scar.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breaker, and the curse is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not come to extract all the members of a broken person on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are great, it does not come to put on gloves before the day of the 25th or the 30th, or more according to the urgency of the aposteme, hot sometimes.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and use the following method of ancient embrocations to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour so it stands at the walls of the mill, and confound it with much egg, and put this concoction, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the embrocator restoring the fracture in many ways, especially for women and small children, since it is not too thin or too thick.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering that restores fracture, dislocation and torsion: take honey, blackberry juice, nettle leaves, arnica, gum arabic, muget, aniseed, mirr, aloes, alecyl; and grind them into powder, and mix them with sheep's fat. If the complexion of the body is warm, use this plastering, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plastering that benefits from torsion: take muget and viscose, aniseed, mirr, aloes, acacia, blackberry juice; grind them well and mix with oil or sheep's fat, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of plastering for joints and bones out of place, and to soothe sudden pain and cut bone: take a new lamb, and grind its flesh with water and oil, and apply it to the affected area. This plaster does not restore, but is good for soothing sudden pain in an aposteme [joint] and properly heals the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of plastering that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of the fig tree and earth leaves [ 아마도 "토양 잣"을 의미함], grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method for treating bone fractures and reducing the remaining abscess. Take an equal part of wormwood, camomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, and grind them with wine; heat the members, and apply it with coriander water or vinegar, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another, stronger method than the first, for treating abscesses during the restoration of the member. Take an equal part of wormwood, flax seed, plantain, melilot, and fennel, as well as violet flowers and camomile, and grind them with salt water or plain water or wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras says that you should not put anything on the broken member except a wax and oil paste, and nothing else; he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galenus says that you should put dry things that are a little warm on the broken member, in order to restore it; we have said this before: for example, mirr and aloe, incense, and similar things.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Autre manière d’empâtrer que vaut à la léison et à la douleur: prenez mugath et chevolz d’omes décopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismale veau, et seil égalment, et les broyez, et en fais empâture et lu lie.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved out of place; if so, do not take it apart with your hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if the pain or itchiness comes back to the spot, and there is no rest or swelling, do not delay, and take it apart, and now apply the poultice; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it into the water, and lift it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is gone;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put a dry cloth on it, moistened with spring water or rose oil, and tie it with a knot, until you are sure that there is no heat;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and relieve its pain, then continue the gentle massage, and a little bit of ointment, and do not strain it as much as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscess, redness, pain, and swelling are all gone, and you need to use ointment and bandages, then continue with the same treatment as before, as you have done in the first place.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if the member does not improve as we have said, then do not dislocate it again until at least three or four days have passed, and never more than ten days. But according to what is observed, as long as the rupture approaches the shoulder joint,
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then hold it back more than before, and let it grow thicker, as I have said before; and if you see that the member is drying up more than necessary, know that dislocation will not come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Let the patient take a hot bath every time he dislocates it, and do so every day, and pour a little oil on it.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work then, the patient should wrap his member tightly in a cloth, and carefully stretch it out; this is painful, and if it causes pain in the joints, and I see no other way but to make it loose and set it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways to break something, and there are different shapes and causes for it.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For he has fractures that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all the way down to his ribcage, as if it were a stake or a pole; and for this reason this mode of breaking is called "hematoma".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone from above, and this mode of breaking is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact within, or a split or fracture from the collarbone of stone, or of a chair on a stone, or of other things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a perforating fracture that approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or that is on top of the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has healed over bone as fine as hair, and the split is small, and for this reason it is called this rupture "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and a piece of bone enters the body, and the head becomes twisted as the blacksmith does when he works on the bellows; then enter into the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And if there is a joint in the neck that has become moist with sweat, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and all these types of fractures are similar to small pieces that are broken up as if they were tiles; and I will speak about them in their own time.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of broken bones by traction on them, and the investigation in tents, and by the corrupt cart which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is obtained by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed it, thus opening the fracture blacken it.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, be careful of the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of reason, extension, palmating, feverish water, or the hairs standing on end, and other similar signs in multiple disorders, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see such a frightening accident, and you expect salvation to begin, then start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when you first deliver the baby, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after its birth that you can do.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone does not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the tissue that covers the skull, you must split it open: and it is that you press the head of the malady, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the injury of blood comes with the discovery of the bone, or abscess, you must help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet linens in oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and are sure of the loss of blood; then begin to cut into the bone, and it is made according to 1.ij. ways of work: one way that you cut at the narrow end in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I bottle another length longer than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several different lengths, some are short and others are long, and they are pointed, and are made of iron; and work lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it from within, thus that you bring the tallets with tares, not entirely through so that the point goes beyond the bone, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, that does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place at the edge of the bone, so that you have tares for all the test; and this is the form of the 1.ij. ways of tares:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it seems to you that you should remain the апретеit which is delayed from the bone to any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more pliable and thinner than the other incisor;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it does not delay any small bones, nor any scales, if the bone is lightly cut with .i. instruments; then cure the wound with the tithes and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of work which is that which Galen says, and it is much safer; and the word is very strong, and it is his saying:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover part of the bone, where the fracture opens widely, so that when you have uncovered that part, you put on the edge of this lenticular incision, from which it takes its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and this part is wet in 1.2 edges, so that the cutting goes around the bone; then beat a little mallet from above, so that you chop the bone lightly all around, and you take great care of the cloth that is attached to it;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it hurts the bone, so the bone is lightly chopped, because if you cut the bone well, harm does not come to it, and fear does not come to it.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone does not hurt the skin, and the bone is cut only as much as necessary above, and there are small pieces, then feel that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to adjust in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are about to shave with a sharp razor, and then with a finer one, do not cease from doing so until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and fine trimmings, you must provide advice according to their style; this is a thing that is not well replied to by those who have put their study in this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is clean, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and oil it with oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another doubled cloth, made of two or three pieces, and oil it with wine and olive oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this lighter than you can, so that you do not injure the wound, then hold it above the other linen, and do not strain it except to soak the wound entirely;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it thus.i.j.r. or j.r., until the abscesses are calm, then release it, and administer medicines as roots of herbs, and flour of times, and incense powder, and aristolochy, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer medicines sometimes without stinging;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and guard that the wound is clean and dry, so you do not allow infection to enter, nor do you allow any bowels to gather together over the wound because when bowels gather over the wound of the skull, if it is corroded and rotten, it causes the patient great evil; for when you put on a wound a poison-containing thing, if it burns above it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackened comes only because of the medicine that you have put on, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and 1 drape of glue, and put it on the wound;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the treatment of ways as it understands, until he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the .ij. parts of the neck above are never broken by the fall, because they are .ij. bones; and this neck bone is cartilage, and does not break unless it bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the .ij. parts is broken, then you should put your little finger or thumb at the end of the neck, and make it equal to the natural shape by turning it from side to side, until the neck regains its natural form;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do so lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if he breaks in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to his place, then you shall put him equal with a ray of light in the head.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if he breaks in two parts, then do not restore it the first day, but hasten to restore it the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If it does not heal after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess is dried up, then bind the head with linen cloths, if he breaks in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And you should bind another with another, if he breaks in one place, and let the cloths be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that one should not soak the tent in oil, and let it dry every day. I do not think this is right, but it seems that the tent should be soaked in sheep's fat, and powder from a mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use goose feathers in tents, and if it's wet drape it with linen, and let the breeze blow through it, and blow the illnesses out; or else do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes while you are sewing, then put cotton or wool soaked in oil on it, or a little bit of dyakylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess comes, then put plaster on it, made of meal and powder of silsage, mixed with sheep' fat, then put it on light clothes, and don't tie the cloth;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the breaking of the neck is small, and it is broken into little pieces, so it is extracted with suitable instruments for this, then cut the wound, and cure things that cause chafing of the car, and souding, as plasters and ointments are suitable for this;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound within the neck, then heal the tenderness, and put on leathery clothes, until he is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the breaking of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is only a little one, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inwards, then know that it can be reset gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right side, then insert your two fingers into the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left mandible, then insert your two fingers from the right hand, and press gently inside and turn the other way, making it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is displaced in 1/2, then it is necessary that you give support with an extension of 1/2, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement or pain, then strain it with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then put on the broken mandible a cerote, and put on 1 double drape; and put on the drape a long and wide piece of leather that fits the mandible, and fasten it to the jaw with a hook; and order the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the face is changing, then put it aside on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on, with flour from the mill mixed with ash or bran; after which you have taken off the cerote; and put on a light plaster, and if the plaster dries up, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it for as long as it remains healthy; often 3 weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take out any piece of the bone; if subtle of the ostium are tools suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, then broaden it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have taken all the pieces of bone, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, then put on it plasters suitable for this, to protect it, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the arm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	of the arm broken several times before, before the shoulder, and the break so is according to 2.3 ways: or it is broken and dislocated in 2.1., and I have pieces, and is the lighter to restore; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the overtaking so is when the break is without pain, that you have 2 ministers, so that one pours water on the shoulder that is broken; and the others extends the neck toward the side; then place equal to your two sides, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or hair.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have need to extend more, then put a round staff of cloth, or of wool, and make it heavy according to your necessity; and lift and stretch the shoulder, and hold the staff in your hand, so that you place equal the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shaft away from the shoulder as it comes out completely, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back and raise the shoulder with one hand, and hold the neck of the shaft with the other, until the bone of the shaft is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on both sides, and if you find a small fracture, then you must split it open; and pull the pieces out lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined together by any means, then wrap the tool around the limb for protection:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and make it into a spoon-shape, and let it not be too narrow, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the scope of the work; and have .ij. chieries, if you wish, and one is wide and the other is narrow, just as is the fracture of the wound that you made when you broke the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are secure of the joint, if the wound is hot, and if the fracture is small, or if you doubt about the joint, then employ the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come up, if it is damp, dip a cloth in oil, ash, and wine, and put on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The extraction of bone, when it is sore and swollen, is that you put on the bone a plaster of the flour of the mill and of ash of hen, and put light strokes on, and put an awl through the joint if you need to do so;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very long band of one palm wide, then put two cloths on top of each other, and wrap the plaster in; then take a thin stick of two hands wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the top of the bandage is hanging down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stick on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and fasten the break at the elbow; and take off from each part, and when you see that the time is right for the bandage to stay in place, and you can clearly see that the stick does not move away from the bone, then put it on every day, and when it is tight, if it relaxes,
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the sick person lie on his side, and put it on him when he sleeps . i. that he makes a hole in the shoulder blade, so that the dislocation comes up higher; thus will the break be eased by the alignment of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes from it, until 20 days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then start the treatment again if you see that it is necessary, hold and let it be like this until he is healed; and it is healed in about 26 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	from the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Then have the shoulder properly cut and prepared, and do not touch it until it is ready; then apply the powder from the mill with water, and make it light, and put it on 1. double cloth; then put a wide and thin piece of wood on top, a little wider than the shoulder, and strip the hair from the wood in any place on the shoulder, except that you use linen thread; so that the wood is equal on all sides; and then bind it firmly, so that the wood does not move at all, and inspect it every day; and whenever it becomes loose, rebind it, and make the wood equal if it moves out of position, and lay the patient down on his side; and the shoulder is healed in 20 or 25 days.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone extends forward and does not tear the flesh, then cut it with the saw, and make what we have said in breaking the forceps to soothe an abscess hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of breaking the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	and if it is broken in the middle, but it breaks often towards the outside; and when it is broken in the middle, if it declines to the root, and causes great pain to the patient, and a lack of aliveness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the patient lies down on his back and the doctor places a cushion between his legs, then presses the shoulders together, and with subtle movements places the ribs at equal intervals, in all ways as necessary; then wrap him in a light cloth, and cover it with salt or another lighter substance, and tie it securely around the bone, so that it does not move; and return it to its place on the back, and hold it fast, and adjust it every hour, and if it relaxes, then release it; and if he needs to be released for corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and release it, and remove the covering, and treat it in the manner of cures; then remove the covering, and hold it securely until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the break of the ribs does not come except in large ones behind the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend too much because they are thin; and I feel it well to the touch.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And restore them so that you leave the break even, if it is right. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a splint, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is declining inside, then the patient feels great pain and pain, as if he were crying, because the bone hurts; and it makes him dizzy, and he vomits much blood, and it is bad health, and the old have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if of those who serve that it comes to administer meats which swell the belly, so as to throw the wind away from the back.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that warm blooded animals do not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let the patient be seated.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And say that there is no one who puts the cup on top, to suck up the form, and this seems right; nevertheless, doubt I that the cup draws up the excesses to the top by the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that everyone should cover the place of another's moisture with hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space even, then be cured from the plague cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear the bone which punctures the towel, there is doubt in the patient; then it is necessary to split over the bone of the broken rib, and to put a tool there so that the medicine does not leave; and then the bones must be cut, and pulled lightly, and then stitch the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure them with ointments until they are well. And if abscesses come up, then put wet sheets in oil, and put on his place; and cure while the place of that who has an abscess is clean, and let it rest comfortably on the rib where he should be, until it is well.
de la brisure dou col	from the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No comment comes
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it happens to anyone, and you know if he will be healed or not, see if his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move nor extend them, and when you prick them with a pin, if they do not feel pain. Know that it is fatal in many conditions, and if they are mute and feel pain when they are pulled and not moved, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the patient will be healed, if he is put to work.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know if he will be healed or not, see if his joints are soft, and if the accident that has happened in his hands, and on his back is windiness and excretion without will; and when it is soothed on his belly, if there is excretion without will. And when it is soothed on his back and he wants to stand, he cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not work at all in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then this is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if this cure is that you give him oil of rose or oil of meadow-weed, as much as it is soothed; then put on one of the plasters comfortably and dry, and tie it with a rope, and order the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any tooth is loosened, cover it with a cloth; and set the tooth back in place, then join the 12 lips of the wound together, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat the infection with ointment, bringing water to the surface, until it heals. And if the tooth is broken, which is called "the tooth of the jaw," if you hold your pouch with your left hand and put the poultice on top with your right hand, then make it even, and if you need to, put the splint on, and if any teeth have been loosened, tie them together, and cure the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	for the break in the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it has, there will be a little decrease at the top; and reduce it with an awl, and bend it to the right side, and there will be pain and swelling for the patient in that place, and a lump will form.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, make it even, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or she declines inward, let the patient lie on his stomach until the healing of that fracture is arranged.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you place it on the plaster, then put a beam of wood or timber upon it and tighten the fracture so that it does not move; and fill in the space between the ribs with earth until it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And when the abscesses come, if they do not pricked, until the abscesses are healed, and place this which we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, unless there is any bad accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	of dislocation of the shoulder The shoulder is what lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of these two ways: of which one is that you take a strong lever, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And you take 2 chains and tie them together, and lift them up, and cut the patient on one side; then put him on the lever arm of the fust, until he comes to the dislocation, and take a piece of wood to support it; then put him on any heavy object or hold it with his ministers; then you join the two ends together of the break, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you support the patient on his enemy, and tie his hand to his neck, then order 2 ministers that one hold what is on the break with their hands, and the others stretch out each according to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then strap .i. the joint of the shoulder, and on top of it, and extend each of the servants to his part. And if the joint is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary for you to put .i. the strap around the shoulder, and another one toward the chest, above the joint; and if the joint is towards the chest, then it is necessary to tie it lightly, without working too much, until the joint is in its place, and on top of the chest; then make the joint equal as it should be, and extract it, so that there are no abscesses.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not extract it until 5 days have passed, and put on the wound a poultice of ash and oil rosin, until the abscess is calmed; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the joint, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; then wrap it up, and extract it on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place of rest, unless something hurts it, or the bone is broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and put on the joint a splint wider and stronger than the others, and leave between each splint 2 inches of space, and let each splint be as large as it passes the joint 3 inches from each side; then extract on the splints, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the joint, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the stars, and the extraction, as we have said, at the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess hot, so leave it tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each .ii. days, that itch does not flourish or come to the seat, or the new growth cannot come to the member because it is too constricted. If it is addressed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such an accident does not occur, do not untie it until after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back with his hands on his stomach; and put the shoulder in a cuisse of lamb evenly twisted, and look every hour during the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move or become softened; if it begins to improve, make it large. It is usual for the shoulder and leg to be retrieved after ten days; and then he should be untied and given baths and medicines of ointments to address the pain. And if the constriction is ugly and clogged, do not untie it until one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .iij. bones, which are called the 'fiscule', one of which is small, and lies near the thumb; and the other is large, and lies opposite to it. The large fiscule may break away by itself, or both may break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fiscule is broken, the repair is easy and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is bad healing, and more painful than when they are both broken together. If only the small fiscule is broken, then the proper thing to do is to stretch it slightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large fiscule that needs to be stretched, then stretch it more strongly; and extend it on .iij. cuisses, and tilt the pouchet of the hand higher than the other two, and the small fingers lower than the others; and let the patient cross his arms over himself at the shoulder, or with a strap, and one minister at one elbow, and another at the other above. And then make the arm even according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then place each one in its place, and if there is any that does not grip the curb, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it to the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And so with the cauterizer to wound, I have spoken of it to the unique chapter; if take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of recovery there are abscesses, there is a bandage made from oil and wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and this bandage is placed gently above it, until the abscesses have subsided. And then the wax is removed, and powder from the mill with plenty of vinegar is applied, and the plasters are put on, and let the bandage which is on the bruise dry a little more than the others; and know that there should be vi. plasters or arms in various dispositions: whether the bruise is in one bone, or in 11. If you strain it further than anywhere else, and always less as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the ointment; and let the bandages which are on the bruise be soft and wet, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread from which it is pulled be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And return the member and the ligament after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you should wash the member with hot water until the itching has subsided; and let the member rest without being confined. And then begin again to strain, and if the ligament is relaxed and the bone is deformed, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the member becomes too confined, then you should make it a little softer, and leave it thus for several days, until the confinement has passed, and then begin to strain again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then let it be until .xx. days, or until he is able to walk, then let him tie his hands to his neck, and make his necks equal, and guard against movement and damage, and sleep on his back; and know that this healer is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Says that at the back of the hand and to us there are few breaks, and it comes but a little often.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or splinters, so that the patient cries out, and sits upright before him equally; then put his hand on the table extended, and extend the minister the bones that are broken, and put them equal to the mirrors, as long as they are well joined; and put the plaster and staples, if there comes any, then put a cloth according to the quantity of the place; and is wrapped in 1. drapes of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Et s'il se brise au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu'il l'estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l'estrain d'un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l'estraint, si com il covient.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the back, then it is necessary that you put a splint on, and another under the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then wrap them tightly around the hand, and seal the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks on one of the two hands, then it is necessary that you make it even, and hold it steady, as it should be; and you hold it with the plant, and if you see that it doesn't move, then you lift the break with a small straight splint, and don't let it move; and if it breaks on the other two hands, then you make them even, and tie them together tightly so they stay in place; or you tie them all together while holding them up, so they stay in place, or you put a splint on it, like a pouchette; and take care with the treatment and arrangement of the aposteme, and assist those who are injured, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	De la cuije briseure
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the hip are often broken, and one can clearly see them move forward and backward when they heal; and the healing is good if they are set above and below where they were broken.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient should lie on his face, then spread out his legs evenly; and it is when the fracture is well formed that the bones are separated.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	If the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one of the links goes towards the knuckle of the leg, and the other link goes to the root of the break; and if it is near the knee, then one of the links goes towards the knee and the other extends downward; then put the bones to their natural shape with your hands, and then set the plaster on them, and tie them together, except for the toes, because they must not be tied.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess, let it rest and then return to the work of healing and curing; the time required is according to this method.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the break in .i. a hard cloth twice in .ij. or .iij., and wait for the excess to dry, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the birth, and bind .i. a long thread between the buttocks and the leg, leaving the knee out, and bring the head of the thread above; then turn on the leg and the buttocks the cloth, then put stakes on the break, and put one stake on the bone of the leg; then employ the space left between the leg and the buttocks of drapes to make the bandage even, then begin to tie in .iij. twists or iiij. on the break; and as you go up the break, and less the bandage; then enter the .ij. stitches that you have bound between the leg and the buttocks, and tie .iij. stakes that are above, then return to the knee of the head of the thread, until you come away from the foot; and let the bandage be if it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then k'it does not come back an abscess or swelling or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it should happen, if it loosens and turns this way or that way as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that it holds, if necessary, they should be removed; and if they cannot be removed, the joint should be split and pulled out forcefully; and the cure should be made as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the buttocks broken in this way that we put stakes, as in the aid or arm; however, in the restoration made in this way it does not ring the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the cook is recovered after one day, or less or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gangrenous wound
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	For in the gangrenous wound there is sometimes a little fracture, but it often bleeds many times. And if it fractures, it is only a small hole or pit, and has many holes, and feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing is such that one who is torn on both sides should be made whole again, as much as possible; then apply plaster, and put a smooth wooden splint, if you need it, and adjust it as described for other fractures, including the hot and cold treatments and other things mentioned; also apply treatment to each injury as necessary, until they are healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	that in the leg is .ij. bones, so that one is called by right not "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and there is all the same break as it comes to the arm, and for this the restoration is as that of the arm evenly, and the work is all i.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, so turns the leg on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, so it turns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, so that it is felt to be painful and seen well; then turn back to the dislocation. Then bring extension, and make it equal, and tie the stars equally; but nevertheless, it is appropriate that the break is ugly, and there are more pieces, that the extension is less and lighter; and align according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take 19.2 pieces of long, smooth wood that cover the leg from one side to the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in 19.2 bandages above and below, and bind this to the limb, and at this binding place the leg should not decline towards the right or the left, and so it is good; and no one administer 1.9.2 pieces of long wood, and if it is smooth, and put the leg in order to prevent movement, and properly do this in the break or where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, in order to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; cure as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bone of the foot comes in one break and two times, and it has never happened that it comes broken except in many conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones surmounting one another, so put this patient like a stone on the earth, also as if he wanted to walk, then now put your foot on his side, where the bones are raised up, then press them until they go back into their places; then apply the plaster and hammer it down, and tie with a small rope a piece of cloth weighing about 4-5 pounds, then secure it to the front of the foot, then you have wrapped your drapes and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, then remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, then restore them, as we said for the hand; then place on the broken foot an stake according to its length, and make it a little wider, then put on the foot that little cloth that I mentioned, and hold it forward; and if there are more than one or two broken, each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I said for the others who are broken, as soon as we have said; and help each accident as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from breaking of the bone of the shoulder joint
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the nature of the woman is broken, if she is seated enlarged, then lean her to the back part of the spine, and hold her behind; then fill the cavity of the nature with cotton, and also put in it as much as i.i. a stone; then turn the woman, and gently press the spine little by little, and then take out the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she urinates, if the stone is taken out, and when she has finished urinating, put it back again, and so make 30 days or more: then will be restored the break, and she will die, take a bladder of buckthorn, and tie a cord to the hernia, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow in the cord making shapes, until the bladder is gone inside: the nature will then return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the wrist of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use thereupon, and listens to my book. For the break signifies many things to the right way of restoration: hear it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the hernia, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and pour it into the hernia; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it like that for .iij. days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the chest or shoulder or similar, to be healed at this time, so that the wounds that we have spoken about serve as testimony.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, unless there is another matter, then begin to restore the fracture in this same hour, or that day, so that the aphorisms do not come again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the aphorisms come again, unless you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the aphorisms are calm, and do not touch them or at any time on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on the leathery skin uncovered, so that you put it to rest lightly with your hands, at small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal to your hands, then put it to rest lightly with this iron instrument, which has .vij. or .viij. inches long and the thickness is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this purpose use three or four drops according to what it needs in each cure of a break; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your ovraige, and be sharp before and thick in the middle forward:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And this is called a "palainche", because the broken head of the bone must be placed on top of the bony tip; and it should be struck once, until it heals, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is slight, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, you must cut off the tip of the bone, until the instrument can take hold of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, cut it with a suitable instrument, or chisel or file, at your command; and resect what is delayed in the bone with small incisions.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the jaw is brought back together, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then wet.i. a drape in red wine vinegar, and make sure it is clean; and do not put it on the wound with wax or anything else where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer leeches when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap it all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be well assured that the wound will not be constricted with the fracture; and many times this has been done, and they have brought upon the patient death or corruption without fail; and the ligatures are softer and less sore than those of other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that bad accident will not come, since we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it is not good to put on leeches; but wrap around, instead of leeches, hard drapes, and tie them. And when you see after.i. a day or  .ij. days whether Bowen comes to the wound, if oste that which you have put on all over with wine, and put on ointment healing wounds, as ointment tetrafarmaciton and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members are dislocated in such a way that the bow moves downward lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the pain persists, and he cannot join together but comes back together with a bow, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you open the wound with care, and take out all these painful pieces.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if the fistula appears at the place, or any other corruption, it is necessary that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as the bone of the chest or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not pull it out, because many die if you do so; but leave it until it rots; then, after xx days or xxx, cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruses that come from the sudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come again and again after the health of the broken member, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps cannot do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore that we come again and again after the health of the broken member, most especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps cannot do its natural work.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	For when the bone is healed, and stays after weak and fragile members, it is for many reasons: because it was too tied up, and was not tied up as it should have been; or because it had too many ties, and could not get the right amount of movement to the member; or because of many inflammations; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is such that you make the patient eat, and make the frame soft, until the bones multiply within him; and administer bath, and give pleasure and rest; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts to his great thirst, and wet it often with fresh water, until the thirst passes into the member; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the wounded limb after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that we must break the member all over again, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and they bring about great harm and even death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is convenient that they be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften them are cooked, as foiles de vismalve, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make a poultice of softening stuff, such as well-made astringent, and take the musk of vismalve, and confit it with butter or oil of sesamum, and make a poultice thereon; or you take fat figues, and crush them with hay of coles, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never is the bone moved for rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands. And let there be movement to the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the deformity is rigid and hardened, as in a stone, it needs to be opened with fire, covering up to the bone, with a sharp, light knife; and put on poultices and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it now brings back sensitivity to touch.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if we delay, and the veins swell, and by chance we put them back to their place; for so it is not convenient that we move them when they are swollen: many times such a thing brings spam and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happens, if we make the patient well, then let us leave it, as long as the abscess is relieved; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and treat each limb as it comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the treatments for dislocations of the shoulders until they are completely healed.
des mandibules	The jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Here is the translation of the text:
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are small, they are brought back by these eight dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must take it back to the hospital immediately, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the sick person with a little water from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is of .ij. parts; and the other two hands are far away, so that they remain even; and instruct the patient to let his jaws become soft, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he holds the mirror up to nature, as long as it remains in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it returns, surely the two jaws are together, and if they arise from cold water and oil, as long as you gently re-set them; do not delay in setting them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they have been gently re-set and the mouth of the sick person is well closed with a softener, if you put it on drapes soaked in oil and wax made from oil and wax, then gently remove it;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the sick person sleep on their back, and their jaws be between the two knees, so that they do not move or make an effort to open wider, but eat soft food, as long as the pains are relieved and the jaws are no longer painful.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then cut what needs to be cut lightly, and do not work to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the mandible is well tied and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two mandibles cannot be set back in place within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and usual sore throats come about, and by chance belly-ache, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many times he who had it died in XVII days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the cost over the abdomen and the pelvis, and is dislocated only once towards the rear, and it is felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down slowly on his back, and extends his arms; and then press upon the joint with your palm, and it will return; then put the plaster and the bandage on, and hold it fast;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the shoulder that is over the neck cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated only once, then he returns to his place, as we have said; then put the plaster and the bandage on, and hold it fast, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus also is returned the shoulder of the spear, when it is taken out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	is dislocated except for two ways: one is that it dislocates to the part of the shoulder blade from its place; and the second is to the part of the foot; and by chance it dislocates to the part above, and this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate inside for the ribs; and many times it dislocates forward toward the shoulder blade, but at these who have little money, because at them the wound is made very big, so they go to hospital; and at those who have enough money, the wound is small, and they go back home.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance some men have a blow or break, and breaks the shoulder blade with a hot apothecium; and believes that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary for you to test it, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is known to dislocations when it turns down towards the shoulder, and makes a difference between the diseased and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a depression, and remove the shoulder from the neck at the head of the shoulder, just as it were a ball; and the patient cannot move his arm to its side, nor make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it has dislocated upwards, it is then hidden, because you can clearly see it at the base.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not always to be brought back, when it is new, or the disease has seized him.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers lift up the hand of the sick person above, then put your thumbs down on the shoulder, and force the joint up to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, because it puts itself away; so come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in the hands of days later, then it is convenient that the sick person be bathed in warm water; and the minister gives a soothing and soft preparation, as if an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and is given;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	and then the sick person is to be laid on his back, and a sheet of equal size is placed over the shoulder a little too soft or a little too hard, then the minister places the heel of his hand on the sheet, and holds the head of the shoulder firmly, and pulls the hand of the sick person;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and others ministers teigneth the head of the patient so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns all at once, and thou seest if you reset it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and so you make present  .i. a man who is greater than the patient; and let it be right toward the side of the cost, and bottle up this shoulder from the axis of the patient, and lift up the axis toward heaven, so that the patient hangs by his armpit;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and others ministers pull down the patient's arm from below his abdomen. And if the patient is too light, then pull with it something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the reset can be done also in this other manner: and is that you make   .i. long piece of wood on the ground, whose axis is also as a   .i. pistol, and is not too big nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	And then put the sick person in a warm bed, but let there be a blanket over him, and the sick person be standing long-winded; then extend his hand upstream on the other side, so that the joint will come back to its place firmly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood from the arm of a great oak tree, two hands and three feet wide, which has the head standing on the edge so that it can enter into perfect dislocation in order according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	And then place it on the top of the wood, so that the sick person is not hurt, and then put it under the shoulder; and extend your arms above the long arm, and then place the aid on the wood, and the hand at the head, and then set the hand on a step of a stone, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now be back in its place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is back in place, in whatever way that may be, then it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a piece of wool that is even; and then set the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and ash of thorns, on all the shoulder and around, then draw it out of the shoulder before, and tie the bandage onto the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drinks little, so that the members are comfortable, for they will heal sooner; and then drink more after 3 or 5 days, and move them; and if they are stiffened and are not softened, then they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place because of moisture which has come or because of another cause, then it is necessary that you apply the cauterization to 3 quarters, as it was described earlier or with the paste of the cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after 5 days the joint still does not hold and the arm cannot raise it, then you will know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is dislocated or stretched or softened; and you will know that the joint has never been put back in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is around the loins and the breasts, or behind them, is made by impact, and extending of the hands, and I apply another place; and treat as long as they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes the greyness of the member, and it is slow to move again, then the patient uses it many times until that greyness is healed, and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation from the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Sache that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at its ends and returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the sound, if you can see it openly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you bring it back in this way as the abscesses are dry, because if the abscesses are wet, then it would be painful to bring it back; and by chance can not be brought from all and everything, especially when it is behind; so much worse than other dislocations, and is of great pain, and by chance comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is done, when it is so that you can bring it back, that you extend her hand to your 2 hands; and her arms are spread out, and the hands from the wrist according to the neck between, behind and in front, and push the joint into its sheath together, or at the root of her palm, until she regains her place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, return when it doubles its hand to its root, and turn it which is dislocated behind.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, then give strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and dip them two ministers, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, and because you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he sets his hand to the joint with oil to soften it, then put the joint back in place until it heals again;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put plaster on it dry with honey and extract the form, and raise the arm of the patient at the shoulder, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is stable in place, then release it, and if you see that the joint does not move well, then restart the plaster and the bond, and leave it for a while until it is firmly set, then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and gently massage it, and press until it is relieved; or put a sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it. a day and a night, then wash and dry it out, and let it enter or bathe;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he goes, he rubs the joint gently then puts it back on, and then enters or bathes; and thus does 19 times or 20., until he is well; and if you see, put it on the end of a wet cloth heated with butter, and strain it up; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand should be reset as soon as possible, even while it is still dislocated, so that its place is not lost; and likewise, if there is swelling, or if there is heat.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	and if you put the injured hand on a table, and extend its fingers, and then reflect upon it; so that it puts its palm against the joint, and presses it down until it comes back to place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	All the same, it is necessary that you check if he is in the right position; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and you look at it; put your hand on that appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then he incises the abscesses gently, and lets it go like this.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after a few days, then wait for the joint to heal.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and does not work for the patient as long as his hands are wet, and he cannot extract anything: so you know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; there is no other device for extracting them except by using a delicate cautery, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, he puts it on the plaster that we have described, then he extracts and leaves it alone for a while, then he unties it and leaves it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, if the moist hot water, and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	None
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then hold the two together and press the joint toward the part where it is joined;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and then leave it for a while and then set it back in place; and then remove it again, so that he can move it, and put it back in place, and do this often, until it is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same thing if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is well; and do the same thing if it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	I will do my best to translate this text line by line as you requested. Please note that I am not a medical expert, so if there are any mistakes or ambiguities in the translation, it is recommended to seek clarification from a qualified professional. Here is my translation:
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, there may be multiple dislocations if not properly treated, for this leads quickly to death for the patient."
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the swelling suddenly stops without a trace, cannot be held, and often all members or two arms or one leg become soft."
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shoulder becomes mute in three parts; that which becomes mute at the back is called "gilboiste".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the cure is that if you have a hunched back, it came from childhood; if there is no cure or recovery of all things.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from sitting down, or from strikes, or from similar things, the ancient ways of curing with great words, by which there was no great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the hunched back that comes before the pit, there is neither medicine nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and so I say that what comes straight in one side, and not from the back, for it is this which can be properly cured:
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	is laid down on its back in an even position, and has a poultice applied to it so that it does not burn:
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place 1 stake on the ground in front of it, and another above it, and bind a string around the head of the patient with one end at the feet and the other at the knees:
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the two ministers know the strings, one on the head and the other on the feet, between the two stakes:
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are firmly shut, the twig as we have said, and the mirrour sets its palms on the spine, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this cure, then take a bucket of  .iij. arms long, and shave the wall with it, and place the patient on one side, and pour the water from the top of the bucket onto the spine, then put the middle of the bucket on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrour's palms on the other top of the bucket, and press well, until it comes back to its place; and if you see that it does not come back, then do so with the turner which turns the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And this is that you fix  2.iij. torches to the head of the patient with a long arm, and put between each torch, above and below, a palm of space of length;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and let each branch be firmly rooted in the ground so that it does not move; and between each of them place one branch which turns with it, and let each turn have two small branches which come together, so that the turn can be turned by them.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then place the link between the assistants at the turn towards the top, and the other link towards the tips on the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn to all of the link, and the master puts the spike equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equal, put it on desiccate with a lot of uff, and then the stipes, and then the stele of a tablet of 1.3 inches in length, that by purple the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine sound, then the thread of a link, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle fasting, until it is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if in the end nothing comes of the health, then administer mild and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have said before; and do not give a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never comes the appearance in the back of the spine between the shoulders, and feared that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, so that one should not have presumptiveness: perhaps it would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hip joints
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the hip and shoulder joints come out only as dislocations, not at all like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to: .iiij. parties: inside and outside , in front and behind; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the leg with the sick, it is more distant and opens more the joints of the sick than those of the healthy, and cannot bend the sick knee on fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is this limb which is swollen from an abscess, because the head of the shoulder comes from it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that to which it belongs, if this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that to which it belongs, if it is well bent according to its nature; however, there is no double knee pain, and if one makes it walk, it cannot go forward, and retenes its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it goes, it goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that to which it belongs, if it cannot extend its knee, nor double, and is this leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the head of the shoulder is at the expense of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those who have recently been dislocated, and there are 23 ways to be dislocated, if you hurry to reset the joint, turn it back in, make it firm again, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back, and no other cure is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back in this way, you must provide strong assistance with one minister, and firmly hold the leg between two hands, or tie it to the knee with a ligature:
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and with other ministers extend a hand above in such a way that they support each other's hands, then tie the ligature onto the hip; and another minister ties the knot of the ligature:
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend up and down all at once, as long as the sick person is raised from the ground at one time, and remains so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If that is not the case, then you should put the sick person's back on the ground. When the dislocations are in the neck, if it is conveniente to make the patient lie on his side, then place the bandage on the root of the jaw, and let the knot be at the angle of the mandible, then extend the bandage upward toward the angle, and upward again;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then pinch the patient's arms, and embrace the large knot of the ill jaw, and extend it to the side: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot do this in the way that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the .ij. feet of the patient together with a strong thong over the .ij. heels, and over the .ij. knees, so that the sick leg be extended more than the other two.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang him by the neck from a beam, and let his feet be 12 feet off the ground; then order 1 minister to grasp the lower part of the loins, and let others hang with the sick man who grasps the loins firmly, because the joints will then return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is on the outside, lie down with the patient as we have said in that which concerns gilisheit, and remove 1 thong from the sick leg properly, and also from the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put 2 torches on the head and 1 between the loins of the patient; then put 1 torch under the feet of the patient.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and let him plant wet cloths inside, so that it does not burn the patient; then each minister extends towards him, and the master places it at his side equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it comes back, that's good. If not, put it on the table and press it in the way we said in the dislocation, and lay the patient on his back.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is necessary to extend the leg that is in pain slowly; and according to what I said; and put the master's hand on the leg that is in pain, then press with the other hand, and lift it up towards the hip.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is on the side, if it is not necessary to extend the leg that is in pain slowly; and do not lift it up towards the ground, but rather it is necessary that he be placed on his side as we said before bed on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and extend it above his face, and the link stretched out as we have said before, and should be pressed down on the joint to the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then insert the pegs, and put on the plaster, and pull it with a bandage, so that the ankle does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for three or four days, then take off the bandage and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, then stretch it out, as before, and leave it. three or four days; then take off the bandage, and let him walk loudly, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation due to old age
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The dislocations are issued from none of the joints of its place, por coi he cannot move, and is the members misfigure, and sent the sick great pain and great injury.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he does not extend it to the knee, know that he is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all these is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your knees;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee at your palms, and draw back between the two, then bend the .iij. ribs from the knee forming; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genous returns to its place, and the signs are that he extends his leg lightly to the knee;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and bandage it with plaster, and make the leg rest in the hip, and fasten them together tightly. iij. jors or iiij., then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not in place, so administer an extension firmly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	the heels are never dislocated, and they are never completely displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has come out of joint:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	If they ram it, it is light, and one must stretch it lightly with their hands when it is only slightly bent.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has come out completely, so that you make the patient sit upright, and tie him up with a blanket across his body, except for the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then train the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left, once, and then stretch it up, and blow on the foot up top;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this .ij. times, if as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, then begin again the work, for it will come back;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot come back like this, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put a staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and wrap a drape around it, so that he does not hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then place the minister's knee, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a .i. band, so that he lies on the shoulder of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and place the staff close between the knees of the patient to hold the patient in place while they are being extended;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	and then make the dislocated limb equal with your hands, and other ministers will dip the healthy leg in the brine, and the dislocation will come back entirely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is firm, then put on the plaster and tie it up, and form the support, and fix the foot to the leg, and guard against the straps being too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for .ij. days or .iij., and if the support needs to be adjusted, then adjust it after the third day, and don't let the patient walk until the fourth day;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is an abscess, if it needs to be calmed down as we said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they are gently extended without work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the back of the neck or foot, if it needs to be sat on a flat surface or a table, and put your foot on what opens up these joints, then press with your foot as far as it comes back;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is nothing open, so put the sole of the foot on a table for .ij. shoulders, then strain it by forming, and leave it .iij. days, then undo; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	for wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with the dislocation, and one tries to restore it, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and you have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be hasty:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing anus, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if I put the member back in place now, so that the anus comes quickly;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, then administer soothing anus, and cure the wound, if necessary, with dry ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a dislocation with fractures, and broken bones, do as we have said for simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and you keep from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cause you to miss according to your Creator, and for the sake of protecting your arm and your heart. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here is the translation of the provided text:
