O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O ye, dear sons of mine, I have completed this book, which is the last part of the art of medicine with its prescriptions and explanations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this text, which is part of the work on hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work on hands is well-established in our region and is deeply rooted in all matters, it is a perfection of knowledge and capability, and there is no delay in its application but only small descriptions in books by the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	And it seems to me that I should revive this treatise with the arrangement of this text according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come with the forms of the tools for cauterization, and other instruments for the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this should master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of the osses and nerves and joints and the number of bones, and the movement and flowing of veins and the rest and the source of their movement.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason it is said by Hippocrates that with work there is no lack and with rest there is little; and especially in the art of the hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, he should be careful so that he does not make a mistake and harm people; so that I have wanted many times to prevent those who engage in this science from doing so, because they abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in her neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who tried to remove a stone from a man's bladder; the stone was large; he brought away a piece of the bladder and the man died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen a man who was called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he tried to remove it, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took as his cure an earl of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breaking there was a wound; and this ignorant healer pulled out the break on top of the wound with great effort, leaving no scar on the wound, and left it like that; and he commanded that it should not be taken off; and it delayed so that his leg became completely gangrened and his foot came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come to take off his leg; and when I took it off he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways that the member was corrupted were already confirmed, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go by the member as long as the members were completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another mirage that broke out into an abscess with a putrid taste, and then inflamed by the evil of its dignity.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is purulent with melancholy humor, does not come but one must touch it with iron if it is in a good place so that one can take away all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because, small children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, work in which there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each of these books where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For since it is necessary that you keep them, so that the bad smell cannot offend you. If you take your weapons in agreement, and attack your enemies lightly and firmly, and use the best way, so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and are healed; and leave the probable disease of grief health; and hold your weapons away from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien gives some advice: "Do not take on the care of a bad disease, lest you be called a madman.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cautery and water-based medicine, and the next chapters deal with the order of the process step by step, as well as the forms of the instruments, the fierms of cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters deal with the handling of hair and nails, suction cups, wounds, arrow extractions, stones, and similar matters; and the third chapter discusses the organization and forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and it is ordered that the bones be broken just as much as needed, and the forms of instruments are described.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, since we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of the aid and the harm is the longest word and subtle science, and the replies to this are agreed upon by many sages; and I am short on words because I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is an aid for all colors in which there is matter, except for two types of color: namely, hot colors with dry matter, and cold colors with dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry matter together, they all agree and say that cauterization is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is no aid to illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire if it is hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from heat or dryness; and he who says the opposite that cauterization does great help to hot and dry illness that comes in courses of people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have not found it once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all way, no force should be used but by him who has experienced it, and who knows through long use the chapstick of cauterization, and the diversity of complexions in men, their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the places and spaces of the ten; otherwise we have no fear even for cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of this will agree with and correspond to the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery heals together if there are secretions from wounds, and with greater goodness than medicinal fire cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member in any way.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by removing, and bring about disease of great healing; and perhaps fire due to its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I have found this by experience and from the long service and study that I have put into this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and so, I beg your pardon for the length of my words, for I do not like to deny you the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says by way of proof; and take it into consideration.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at what time; they are to be prayed over.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, for since the resulting harm can be prevented by the aid of cauterization; more so, the cauterization is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And I do not think at all, dear son, as they do so foolishly; for with the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they believe, since cauterization is only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and is worth more as a medicine because of its quick action, and due to its virtue and its nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes according to the complexion of the sick and the place of the disease and its virtue; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of flesh and similar things, unless cauterizes are administered at the place where there is a little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizes of thick for pain, and similar things, and the like pain does not return; but it happened little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why the cauterizes are called the derriers of medicine, and that is to be seen; but they do not believe that the cauterizes are worth after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the cauterizes are the derriers of medicine because when we administer ways of cure in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterize, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, open well that the cauterizes are the derriers of medicine, not at all according to the intentions of foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Li ancien dirent que cauteres d'estrument d'or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l'or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n'est mie voir car je l'ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c'est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d'or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	The ancient ones said that gold cauterization instruments are less prone to inflammation than those of iron, and they only mentioned the color of gold and its high purity for these qualities; they said that the heat of gold cauterization instruments does not cause inflammation, but this is not true, because I have tried it, and I found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterization instruments are more beneficial than those of iron, as they say. However, when you heat up a gold instrument, it doesn't take long to cool down; and if you heat it too much, it will catch fire, and this is enough to prevent it from being used.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use our fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter to the end, because then the vision will be clearer.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is useful for moisture and cold on the skull, and because of many humors that descend from the hairs, and the ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and most especially for all the illnesses that come from cold such as paralysis and lameness and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be cleansed with a solu
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the crossbow in your hands, and place his hands on his pelvis; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his penis between his two roots; and let where your two sides come together, so that it bleeds from there then heat the fire which is called "olivare", by which this is formed:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the sigil of ink, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in turning; then release your hand separately, and burn the root where you see the bone I small; and if you do not see it, so start the fire again as soon as you see the bone, as I told you; after that, take a piece of rope, and put soft cotton inside, and put on the sigil, and let it be III days; after that, put wet cotton on butter; and leave it until it is burned; after that, treat the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said that the older ones, the more the wound is open, the more it will spew; and for this reason if you move it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that no one should let the burn last so long that part of the bone is burned, and then cut off what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other said that one must let the burn last so long, and squeeze it with such force that the humor comes out as wide as a woman puts it in her vagina so that the humors come out; and one must let the wound be open for a long time; after which one must cure and heal.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of burning seem to me neither good nor bad in all respects except that they may be dangerous for certain people; and it seems to me that I should let them burn because the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we see with other limbs; and even if the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of the cautery seems to me more safe and gentle, and from this one I act in such a way that it is salutary.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the child's pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all over the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then use yarrow and pills which are called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and oils and poultices; and if one does the cauterization that we have said above, and it doesn't help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient is of strong nature, and is not too cold; then cauterize it a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing the cauterization on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said above, and do the cauterization at the place which is called "vasselz"; and put the cupping glasses; and hold your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in the others, and I will speak about it later; and it comes that the cauterizations of the corners are thinner than those by which one cauterizes the middle part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou cheif
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly in one part of the chief comes pain up to the oil, and the head is extended by medicines of this world, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none has benefited: then do cauterize according to two ways, that is to say, of medicine water and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization of medicine water if you squeeze a bit of ale, and scrape off the bark and wrap it around the joint, and then make the temple or place where the pain is in a little way that you can reply the ale to remove the skin; and when it has been replied so you bind it well and leave it there for twelve hours; and then unbind it and treat with garlic oil, and leave the wound for two or three days; then put cotton dipped in balm until it can heal.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of wounds as long as he is well; and if you see fit to use any of the burning medicines that I have written or prescribed in the treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "clos" for as the head is made in the form of a hole or he has I piece of corbeure, and at the center to a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little slightly, until the half of the wound is burned; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is faster, and runs abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in silk, and put it on the place for III days; then I put cotton wet in butter, and then heal the wound with the cure of wounds as long as he is well; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer that is called "cultellare", all over the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headache as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization mentioned above does not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thus over the hurting place a line of half an inch long, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come to the bone; and guard against the jaw that mutates when you drink, and let the rest be done in the middle way; but I will tell you how to stop headache when the artery is cut, and I will show you at what place it affects in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these caутers do not suffice to the illness, and the patient suffers, cauterize him at the top of the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the caутer which we have said or chapistry of the extraction of the artery, with the caутer that has II knives; and this caúters are better than that and more aiding.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of ears from cold weather
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ears comes from cold weather, and medicine and other treatments that we have spoken of in the chapter on healing are applied, but the pain does not stop, then heat this caúter called "poins", of which the form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the "poins" caúters all around the ear that hurts, or around both ears where the pain is felt at the root of the ear, and then move away from the ear's root a little so as not to touch it; make X points around each ear; after that heal the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	is cured by fire only of those that move with flu, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make fire on similar things that come from scabs and lice of hair.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this torture of the mouth that moves with fluid, scabs, and lice, and this is not worth it, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further away from the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the fire on the part that should be healed, and let half of the burn be completed before removing it. And this is the form of the fire:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the cutting that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife is a little thicker; after healing the place as I said before, as long as he is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it like we said before, it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then do IIII cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I cut the head off, and I cut the vasculus as we said before, and the cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it heal like we said before.
de litargie	of tar
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient many years and pilules of vinegar in the head; after re-cutting the head of the patient completely, and placing on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written or treated with plasters; and this is the way of cauterizing: if you do so as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy then it is good; and if it is not, he should make three fire cauterizations on the head at the top of the neck, with a space of two inches between each one; and the doctor as for the others, and if you see him writhing, and the patient suffers, he should make one cauterization in the middle; and it is a trade, two others on the two horns, and the doctor until it is healthy; and the cauterizations that are called "olive", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head should be washed with water and with what we have said before; after that, the doctor should wash the head of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and one on each horn, one behind and three at the back of the neck; and if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers and is dying, make three cauterizations at the back of the spine; and let it be until the last cure is burned, and lift your hand; after that, the doctor should continue until he is healthy, and the cauterizations that are called "olive" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsia
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The person with epilepsy should only use the fire cautery if they are feverish; first, wash the head and then perform other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on treatment when the patient is ill and suffering from fever.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot tolerate having their head washed, make them gargle and chew by frequently washing the head with good meat; then, put the child in the middle, and apply the cautery according to what we have said before, and also cauterize the neck and each horn; and if the patient is out of sorts and suffering, apply the cautery as I said for one who has paralysis and stiffness of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and apply olive cautery according to the method I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child: "Apply a fine cauterization according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy there are excess fluids or腐烂的潮湿，那么就用部分火烧法像我们之前说的那样治疗麻痹的人。
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	When because of melancholy there is excess fluid declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he should drink something to clean his brain, according to what we have said about the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the patient's hair; after making a good turban out of linen, also making it into a circle, if you put it on the head; and keeping the patient in a proper position, and well held together from all sides; then presenting the turban, and wetting it with old butter; and heating it gently over fire, so that he can bear it; after taking the turban off and letting it cool; and doing this to the patient every week once with another good treatment, until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And so you see, if you cauterize it with fire, by making many punctures all over it.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing the scalp evenly; and then put on cotton soaked in water and in grease from goat's milk.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes first to the hair by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do the following: drink purifying thing for the scalp, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards let him wash his hair, and let him cauterize the scalp, and let him make two cauterizations on the two temples because it comes first to the hair; or if it comes first to one temple, then do it for both at the same time, and cut off all the hairs; and let him drink a purifying thing for the scalp, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times while fasting. After that, command him to cauterize his hair, and let him make two cauterizations on the temples according to the width of the head; and beware of burning the scalp, and if you see too much hair burning, then stop it with water as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how you shall put out the fire; neither is it good to put out fire by means of salt or damps.
dou cors des larmes	the heart of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or cut the arteries that are in appearance at the top of the head; and it is seen that it is of the cold and phlegmatic surpluses, then he makes the fire that I have said at the beginning of the awed descending to the eyes: I cauterize the top, and II cauterize on the II temples, and II cauterize where they pricked the II bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes well on the brow at all a small fire.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the heart of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then do three nights of drinks for the sick person; after that, he takes up his head, and makes a fire cautery in the middle of the cautery with olive oil; and make two cauteries of the cautery called 'clavis' on the two sides, a little off the hair; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery called 'olivaire'.
de coi ci est li forme:	of which I will tell you:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if you make two cauteries on the two sides as long as the hair is; and do not let go of the hand until the third part of the paper has burned, according to the way that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	dou poil qui point l’oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At times the hair of the oil is converted to the palatine, and pricks the oil, and there are made two kinds of cauterization: namely, by fire or by fiery medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are equal, then put the patient to you; then sign on the paper of the eyes a figure which is also like the feathers of the mirror, and this is the beginning of the sign of the release of the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and musk of pear on the oil, then heat the cauterizer so that this is its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the wound little by little several times, so that the scar is burned at that place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up at the point where the oil is; then put your hand down, and leave it like that for III days, then put cotton wet in oil on it until the scorching is stopped; after the cure of the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hair comes back, and the paper is softened, then start again with the cautery on the same level as before, as you did first; and if the hair has gone away, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural state, and is even, and does not touch the hair the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cautery is that you command the patient to leave the hairs long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf; then take French soap and very hot water, each a .Z., and grind them well together; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down again, then in the shape you have made like the bay leaf, and put on the paper; and if the disease is only in one oil, so must one act in I, and also in both; and pour thereon the cotton wet in oil; and the patient's head be in your own health, and put your little finger showing towards the medicine, and press it a little and move it every time the patient feels tingling from the medicine, for he feels tingling too like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have done this for a long time, take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the medication has passed, raise your head and look if the paper is raised as it would be if it were lifted by fire or by incision; and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then again put more medicine on your head where the medication has not worked, as long as your hairs are even and combed; then put cotton wetted in balm on it until the itching has gone, after treating the spot of the ulcer that is called 'dyaphines' and others, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must keep your hair in place by means of many combs so that the medication does not get into your hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked by oil, then begin again the medicine on that very place that is softened by the paper properly, in the same way as you have done before; after treating until it is well; and this is the form of the fuel of myrrh:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to what you are constrained; and do not be answered with the right path for those who have the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	The treatment of fistulas by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, if your treatments do not benefit, then it is appropriate that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and with a damp cotton ball or persille juice on oil, heat the cauterizer, and bring it close to the hairline at the base of the scalp, keeping it steady; if you see, adjust the position of the cauterizer from one side of the head to the other, and if you don't see, keep it steady like a tent pole; but anyway, this that is heated should be applied for your treatment.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Apres press the fistula will open itself, and treat the pus and dryness; and if it closes up, then operate upon it, and firmly hold the knife at the part next to the oil on your hand, so that your hands do not go wild; and place the knife in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the cauterization just at the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start cauterizing again, and if you need to do it more, and let it rest for three days; after that put cotton wet in the burse on it, and cure the dry wound until it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then apply corrosive water to the bone; and take care according to what has come to its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way of treating fistulas which no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Listen to me on how to treat fistulas, and don’t let it be open; then put in the small hole a fine needle so that this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I pour in the quantity of an inch of liquid; and hold your hand firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, that the liquid does not run to his oil; and you must put on cotton wool dampened with water or vinegar over the fistula, the liquid if applied artfully will go into the place of the fistula, and heal him miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the fire treatment that we have spoken about, then it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must cut into the nose, and bring the fistula to the edge of the nose according to what one should do in his own place.
des crevaices en levres	crevices in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouth times have had crevices in the lips which are called "hair", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small surgical knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it directly in the crevices until it is hot enough; then apply the cauterizer to the area until it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the larynx or at the roots of the teeth, after having caused pus and swelling and it has become a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit: then you must have fire according to the quantity of the fistula; after sealing or piercing the fistula, and keeping your hand until the iron comes out at its bottom, and doing so once or twice, after treating as we have said in the treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its [medical] book.
dou movement des dens	the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are soft from moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines, but that does not work, then put the chief of the sick in your mouth; after heat the cautery whose form will come later in a certain way so that you put a string on the tooth; and place the cautery hot inside, and hold your hand so that the sick feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the sick with dirty water, and the scum a hour and clean thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In that way, the tooth that was moving is secured, and the gums that were soft are tightened, and the moisture that corrupts is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or when there is coldness or numbness, and medicines do not help, then one should cauterize in two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Here is the translation of the text line by line: 
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery all at once if it is such that you squeeze a iron or brass ring, and thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick; after heat the cautery, wherefrom it will form itself thus, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled; do this often, for the pain will be increased the day itself or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the sick person fill his mouth with good butter in the application of this cautery, and then quickly remove it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of the root that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the ring:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold moisture and is not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery root with this being brought here afterwards, and it will form itself thus, and have II openings for the fumes to rise to the cautery from the other side; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, as long as it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be thus III days; and put cotton wet with oil onto it until the burning is over; after treat the wound with onions and tentings as long as it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the throat, and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by solvents medicines; afterwards he must make a cautery on the root of the throat, and you must not come to the throat, and do not dare to stop but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards he makes another cautery on the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and this cautery which is called "clavicle", so that we have the shape in front of us; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the throat are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorbut, and is an old disease, then he must make two cauteries on the jaw in his veins; and another cautery under the breasts; and be the cautery which is called "clavicle" according to the shape which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make a cautery by piercing all the cauterizes that are called "points" which the form is above in the disease of the ears; and be the points until XXX, or so enthor.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards treat the site according to what is said above, and be the cauterizes at three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those who are lighter cauterizes, for those that you do III at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards let the patient lie on his back and his chest; then take the ring that is within the scrotum with your left hand; and if the joint moves within, then heat the cautery that has two nails here according to this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize it until he pierces it as far as the cost of the heart, and comes to the figure of the cautery with four cauterizations; and for this one is made a cautery with three nails, so that the figure of the cauterization consists of four cauterizations; and the nerve is according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three nails:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And no time is applied on this nerve for there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting on the fire cautery, rub it with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well fixed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, what happens then? Then make a cauterization on the thick part of the cautery with claws, or pierce with many cauterizations.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Car li jointure est refermee, et estoste li moistor, et est sanez li malaides.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when in the stomach come coldness and moisture until it is removed from its color, and there are many catsarrows to it, and the manners of usual cures do not benefit it, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and his legs and hands be extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From then on, he makes III fire cauterizations of the bile duct by the quantity of two, at each cauterization klava (a kind of caustic), and two fire cauterizations on either side so that the shape of the cauterizations is at three angles, and there is a space between one and another which they are not joined together when they move (in order to be able to remove them); and let the shape of the cauterizations be in this form without any adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize your stomach with a great cautery according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by piercing and signing on the stomach i.e. at a point according to the quantity that you wish to cauterize then cauterize at all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment for the wound that we had before, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Regarding the liver, if it experiences pain from cold and moisture and excessive wind, as long as it is freed of its excesses; and the patient is treated for what we have said in the divisions, and he does not benefit from it unless the patient becomes lethargic on his back; and sign three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, leaving a space between each cautery the size of two fingers; and let the cautery along the back be long, and do not press too hard with your hand at all the cautery; and let it be burned strongly half the length, and let the patient lie down on his side; and if he cannot, then let him extend his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterizes of the cuttle, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard yourself so that you do not burn all over, for you would make the whole body dry; and let it come to a spark, because the scar is very fine in place, and its wisdom to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can discern whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, the patient feels a slight pain; and if it is in the capsule, the pain is very intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure has finished the pus, it is necessary that the patient be careful on his head; and then sign of where the abscess is, and then heat the fire which resembles the root, from which there is form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cet cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And I cauterize so that the scar be burned, and come until the syphilis, as long as the porreture is all well; after the cure according to the cure of the sweats until he be healthy; and it seems to me that he must endure with difficulty, and always I think that it leave him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	double cautery of the pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient people said that one must do for the pleurisy double cautery of the roots of arista loga, and in a way: take one root of arista loga long, the most large that you can find, and is also dry, and is also as large and as long as your two hands; and moisten it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize I cauterize between the forceps and the chin, and II small cautery a little descending in the part who is desoz the beard; and II cautery between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little; and I cautery emmi the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two ribs after the breast cauterized who is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, rather open it completely as when you are smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no old man used fire cautery resembling a razor, and he rubbed it and put it between the ribs until it reached the abscess; and he jumped out of pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes from which cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they have three ways of fire cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is that you make three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient sweat on his back; and another way of cauterizing is that you rub the cautery that has two ners, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the knife that is at the place of the mouse, or the cuts of the disease come towards the left, and let the elevations that you feel by touching be according to the touch, according to the length of the spine, and let the cauterization be according to the width of the spine.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, put out the two flames until the heat is no longer felt on one side, and then treat with fire again, and so on for three times. And if you see it, cauterize it all, and put out the flames with three flames.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, when he has gotten poisoning for a long time, and that worths more than the other says before.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Do not cauterize with a method called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you have treated it according to the ways that we have spoken about in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to make three cauterizations around the boude (abdomen), one on the stomach, one on the liver, one behind the back on the spine, and one on the pis (pelvis); and let the cauterizations be very close to the joint of the limb.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After remove the fire cautery so that it goes long and slow, and do not stop the patient's cure after the cautery; and the healing would hurry, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the claw that we have before mostrit; and this for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is written here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints are swollen in the droopy one and are pale yellow, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and lower your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so as to burn the flesh, and be the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After do on the legs two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and be the cautery long, one above the knee before and the other behind, between the legs; and leave the cauteries to rest for a long time without stopping, so that the flesh does not burn; after, cure with other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution from the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach and in the intestines are affloiled, and cannot be cured by any kind of cure; and you see the patient very sick and of great virtue, then do a great fire cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken of before or the fire cautery of the stomach, circulating; and IV cauteries around the navel carefully with all cautery nails, and II cauteries on the buttocks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then do a cautery on the hand, and I cautery on each finger, and II small cauteries on the stomach carefully, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are large cold and moist humors corrupted, and they are cured as we said in the divisions, and it does not benefit if you do fire cauterization: III on the spine of the back, that is all far from sore little by little in triangulating, and I cauterize sore the two bones; and if you think that his stomach is cooled down, and the meat does not cook, and we see swelling the face, then let the face have a great cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse to all cauterize nailed; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cured the fever as much as possible.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh that is called "thelue
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you chop the arthritus, if you heat the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all burnt on the chopped arthritus; and let your hand so that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, from which it is free; do this once or II, and if there is much arthritus, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of beneficial ointments until they are sane; and if you cauterize with a big cautery on the armpit, it will give more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will tell you about in its place, comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula that is raised and covered with pus and corrupt moisture, you must provide a delicate tent, and be sure that you know how much it has of perfection.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that entered it, and repeat the cauterization until the course of corruption is finished, once or twice, according to the quantity required; and be careful not to hurt the nerves that are there, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Once the fistula has reached the belly and intestine, take care of these places, and do not burn them except in the charned part, and be sure that it is not dangerous; then heal the place as long as it is healthy, and if the matter has been expelled, know that the place is whole again; and if the matter has not been expelled, know that the place is triply corroded and corrupted to the bone's bottom; and thus, as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys comes with a heavy wind and does not take to women, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from both sides by the cautery that we have mentioned above; and if we make them in the middle, there will be three cauterizes in a line, and they will do greater good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a cautery in the posterior portion above the bladder, where the hair of the pubic region comes together, and one on each side, making each cauterize as long as a penny; and you make one cauterize behind the back, where you need it; and you make the cauterizes clavate according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow the conception of a child, and the flowers are corrupted and their time has passed; and when they come, so great is the pain: then it is necessary that three cauterizations be made around the buttocks, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations be clung to, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hips
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint box, and for this reason it moves away from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away than the other when they are measured together; and the joints are found by touching them with the finger, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint box at the apparent circle, and mark before the joint around the box as it comes back, so that the box is within the circle; and if so, then the cauterizations are such as those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present, make three cauterizations with the olive oil, and let the cauterizations be complete as well; and heal until he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purging the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, make the cautery; and the method of the cautery is as follows: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, some of which are as follows: first, make three triangular cauterizations in accordance with this shape, and make them deep and wide, and leave a space between each cauterization the size of two fingers, and let the olive oil cauterizations; never make a cauterization in the middle on top of the hip joint chief, for there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the fire cautery is at the circle that we have mentioned in front of you in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the thigh, and all the flesh of the knee is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain persists in the thigh and does not reach the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to two or three inches above the ankle on the left side, and is felt as far as the toes or near them, then fire cautery should be done at that point, two or three times; either cutaneous cautery or burn the thickness of the flesh; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three inches below the ankle or near it, then fire cautery is done at that point, which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is a tailor, do more to him; and if he feels that the pain is going from the knee to the thigh, make a cauterization with a cutting cauterizer or circular one, and give him good guard in all your cauterizers so that you do not let go of them even as much as the cauterizer burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more pain and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have also seen many who have made a cauterization on the heel of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the toes as well, and was pierced and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly which he had death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cauterization in one and in the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise said in the cautery of the anus, for which this is the way, make it as big and thick as a thumb or less, and be between cleats and also from one cleat to another with space the quantity of a pea; and let the cleats project on both sides, and be also like knuckles, and I have much well-made iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and wet, and then put it on the chest of the troubled anus, and turn it around the lower back; and cauterize once, and let it rest for three days; and then make a plaster with wax, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of poultices until it is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its poison, and few people use it; but it is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medicine cautery of fire is such that you make a tool with an edge on the margin of the door, and of either brass or iron to a long wall, and at a height there is II us, and II between each there is the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and let them open out and up, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting on the chest of the hip to the patient lying on his back, and quickly place your hand much above the chest; after that, pour in between the II circles of hot metal which is heated by fire a little, and leave it for an hour, and allow the pain and burning of the patient.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l'estrument et leve la hainche d'awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l'eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d'oignemens tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	For the type of mortification that is like fire, and when it has passed, place your hand with the instrument and lift the foot with soft water, and leave it for three days, and put cream on it until the black blisters form; and let it be for pus in the blisters; and he who is behind should help after the treatment with onions until he is well.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take some fine sand from somewhere that the tip of one stick can pass through; and place that pot on top of another well-lined pot, and place alkali and charcoal and some sweet water inside, so much as to cover the two powders when you shake them well with your hand; and leave it like that until it has dried up a little water and has cracked, then take all that water, and pour it over the charcoal and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it has become very dry and is reduced to mud through the work of medicine and other cauterizations, for it does such a work as fire, and with other medicines which are well mixed together with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And the Gallians tell us of a cure wherein an honorable man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein; and he had much trouble, and they said that no other cure was done, and that he was healed with one soul when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you grind the green and dry lead, and mix it with a little fat, and put it on the hip and the thigh and the leg where the pain is, and let it be; and leave it for III hours, and in as much quantity that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bathe as long as his body is a little warm, and he lets the water in, and the pain will go away all and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one must use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Діascăřides saith that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the ends of a goat's horn, then it heals much; and this cauterization should be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and rub it with strong oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the hand and the other which is called the little finger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take dry ends of a goat's horn, and hold it over fire until it is red-hot, and put it on the wool, and leave it there until it is blackened; and do this again, and do not cease to do this as long as you think that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain has stopped; and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterization with a goat's horn".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by rubbing or by too much evacuation, or by the appearance of cold expanded matter, none of these appearances is worth remedies except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate that after the patient has voided any foul pills or other things, a poultice be applied to his back where the pain is, three signs of the cross in each line, and as many cauterizations as the patient can tolerate in each line, using the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do III or IV cauterizations with the clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes about in small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a narrow stance when they stand up, and fear; and you will find behind the spine of the back and on us the appearance that comes upon the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it heal, if you cauterize it with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery is applied equally to each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize within the spine with fire that is two or three lines long, and let the pokes be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards heal the area as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire in gibbosity which is in the spine of the nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain comes out due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, what is called properly 'podagra', and when it is of a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot heal it, then it is healed by fire cautery in this way: Make the fire cautery within the joint of the foot, and let the fire cautery be olive according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if I need you to hold on the face of the foot, he makes a fire cautery with all the fire cautery that is claimed "no".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, he makes a fire cautery on each knee III cauterizes or IV of each part, all olive cauterize; and if you need more, you do more, but do not hold your hand firm except as long as the skin of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, he administers the cauterize that we have spoken in his chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, he makes a point of the fuse II lines; and if there is still pain in the two, he makes a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the neck or shoulders, he cauterizes each part, and does good governance to the patient and applies medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this with good governance and you flush out the phlegm, then you will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	regarding the rupture of the syrup
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the bile descends down to the bowels and is newly formed, then it is necessary that when you look at him, he does not vomit that day; and he uses things that leave his belly empty, so that the end goes down from his belly; after that, let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to shave his beard as long as his bile is repaired, and bring it to your two hands, and sign with a stick above his spine at the knuckle, and in all places that are similar to half of a circle above his chest; then heat the fire of which this form is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and lets out drops.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then put the balls back in place; and the minister should dip his hand so that it does not turn back; and well work on the legs of the patient, and put a cup to him I cussin and I serjant on the legs, and one other on the toes that he dips his hands; then put the fire cautery on his mark on all your hand, and hold it tight and hold it as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, come again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the ball does not slide when you work on the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or some other misfortune.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the fire cautery of children be fine according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the heat is gone; after it cure other remedies until it is well, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that his bandages be kept in place for a long time, so that the ball does not slide when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made girdle is brought to him and worn for 40 more days; and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and against too high heating of the body; and when he has done this teaching, then is he entirely sane.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of surgery in his medicine.
de la routure dou ventre	from the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then he does I the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned with fire the third time of the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the old has said that one should cauterize at the cautery at III angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is to take an axe and make a line across the length of the cut, and another behind it, and all your hand holding the entire clamped cauldron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first treatment is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, or from falling or being hit, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical cure does not help, then it is appropriate that he be cauterized with the cauterizer which is called "point," and the cauterization is done according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is well after the first cauterization, it is good; if not, start again on another part, for custom tells us that it should go to the member that is nearest to him, so you must do the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Surgery should be performed by fire cautery at any time, and most often by the patient suffering from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You should be careful that the disease is just beginning, and if it has already begun as described in the division of maladies, and does not improve or remains stationary, and you are unsure whether corruption will spread throughout the entire body, then perform V cauterizations on the head: I cut off the hair at the top of the head, and the other toward the forehead near the hair; and III on the II horns, and II behind on the nape; and let it burn so long with the cauterizer that it reaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come off without causing any vapor of bad odors to escape; and then cauterize the mole according to what is before you.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et s'il est mélangé partout, il perd manifestement; alors, si cela convient, tu le cautérises avec ces cautères que nous avons décrits au-dessus, un cautère sur la nuque, deux sur la colonne vertébrale, six sur le dos, un grand sur la tête et un autre délicat, deux sur les épaules, deux sur les côtelettes, un sur chaque articulation des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains. Et tu te méfieras des nerfs qui sont derrière, afin de ne pas les brûler; et tu ne feras jamais de cautère sur l'os du poignet, ou sur celui de l'estomac, ou sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And if it is mixed everywhere, it loses manifestly; then, if it is appropriate, you will apply the following treatments described above: one blister on the back of the neck, two on the spine, six on the back, one large one on the head, and one delicate one; two on the shoulders, two on the ribs, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and one in the creases of the hands. And you must beware of the nerves behind so as not to burn them; and you will never apply a blister to the wrist bone, or to the stomach bone, or to the liver. And know that when you make more blisters, you provide more help and benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the blister as much as the healthy person feels it because his body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations are great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing, let the bread of the flour be with honey and other cures until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is healed with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healthy, then let the cauterization be made on the member according to its size and greatness; and may the cauterization enter a little into the flesh of the cure; and then heal with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is made to cauterize and by hand and by foot and by back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is injured; and yet there is no problem if one does not know the members and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of barbers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the "albaras" patient is awake and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a fire cautery a little perfectly, according to the quantity of the juice of curcuma, until the blotch is opened and its color changes; then cure with flour of dates and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of crow and blood of pigeon, each of them in part; and mix them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until he is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for leprosy by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leprosy appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if you cauterize with a fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the leprosy.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet many say that you should also cauterize in the middle of the leprosy; and yet I do not think this is good, because I fear it will become ulcerated and腐した、そして私は一度もそれを試したことがない;そして、私が聞いた最も正しいことは、それが周囲の火傷の周りに cauterizedである、
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes long to die or because of the waste it creates or because the sick person is too old and has little blood, or because they are very weak; then you see them hasten to die: so cauterize them with small fire in piercing; then leave them like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For they will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce them with all the cauterizing, then heat the cauterizer so that it is hot:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterizer has pierced the pus, and let it be such a cauterizer that the sick person feels the cold in some way so that the course of the pus is shortened.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	With fire treatment
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of sickness, which is called "corrodens," and is nothing but a putrefaction of the member, for it corrode the members as much as fire dries them up.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in its early stages that can be treated with fire, then heat the clavers small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the illness is; after having cauterized all sides until you have completely removed all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the burned members oil until the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with ointments that produce heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the hair does not grow, it is good; and if not, then start the cauterization on that which has been delayed from its place corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this ointment has never yet been cured of medical fever in place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said that the cure of medical fever is in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come from the field
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	For sometimes after the rains a disease that is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great thing grown up that bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say fire cauterization, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery with fire if you heat the cautery like a pen of a vouteul, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can hold the nail from all sides, and that it has fine margins; after place all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail; and let it stay so for III days as soon as it begins to move putridity; then make a plaster of wild marjoram crushed with oil, and let the plaster on all night, and let the nails come out and will be rooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound by applying charcoal until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the neck is converted by defuers, and many times comes out and in hands and cuts, then it is necessary that you bring a cautery of hot water; and this is a way: take a chain of air or iron, or a pen of vouteul, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say porrels warts; and put the chain on it so that it turns red all around, then put a little hot water on it, and keep your hand well, and press your hand turning it so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and let the patient feel a little of the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will be rooted from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make another one after this, as long as you have burned all those who are in the core, then treat the wounds that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	He treats the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold or the quarter-fever or other, so that you make them 4 or 5 cauterization on the spine of the back, 1 cauterization between each spine; and 1 cauterization at the feet, and 1 over the stomach with olive-colored cauterization; this will stop the shaking, and speed up the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No medicine appears on the body's surface, or pus-filled blisters, that come from corruzione materiæ grossæ.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If the first appears that you make a cauterization on each head of the blister: a thin cauterization from a branch of mirth, which is taken up by the fire, or from a root of artemisia farida, or with a lente-shaped cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And once the fire cauterizes him at the beginning according to this method, and he cannot grow hair in advance, but the excess is interrupted and he is healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	しばしば、切断された動脈から血が脈打つ音が聞こえ、それが傷口や潰瘍、火傷などの場所に届きます。これは非常に不快なことです。
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	そして、もし誰かが動脈を切り取られた場合（それは傷口や潰瘍、火傷などの場所に届く）、非常に不快なことですが、すぐに自分の人差し指をその血管の近くに置き、血管が収縮するのを感じながら、指から滴る血を吸い取ります。その後、オリーブ油で小さな火傷跡を治すために、小さなものでも大きなものでも、赤く焼いた石鹸を数回火にかけます。それから、傷やその場所に応じて、火傷の大きさに応じて、火にかけます。そして、その火傷の近くまたはその部分に、あなたの指先を置き、血管が収縮している間、火傷に触れないように注意しながら、石鹸を火傷に数秒間当てます。
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps when you feel your pulse on the vein, and the cautery is warm, if you take another of the cauteries that are in the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short of the blood vessel, it cannot be stopped well anyway unless by one of the four ways we have said: or with cautery, or with extraction if it has not been treated, or with a strong thread, or with medicines put on it which have the power to stop the blood; and bind and stretch it well.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a strict binding with cloth or place burning things on it, or similar things, if it does not benefit, then do not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Et si ça arrive à personne et qu'il n'ait pas de mirre ni de remède présent, alors on doit mettre son index sur la plaie de la veine comme nous l'avons dit, et bien étirer jusqu'à ce qu'il soit réchauffé au-dessus de la plaie et de la veine; et ne bouger que le moindre, mais le mouiller avec de l'eau froide souvent car il faut que l'eau froide soit gelée et épaisse et réchauffée; et faire des incisions en avant de celui dont il a besoin de cautères et de médicaments.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical remedies
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Now we have told you in the first chapter all sicknesses due to fire, or burning medicine, and the wounds and causes and instruments and shapes of cauterization; and I put this chapter from the middle eye up to the top, and I will go in this chapter by that same middle path for those who are wounded more easily than those who are hurt.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I am beginning to speak, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauterization, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not take any foolish risks.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the manner of certain people come to cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have so caused themselves that they die easily because of the mischief that they bring upon themselves by their illness and the greatness of their illness, then one should be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these I have who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is contemptible.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not appropriate that you consent to these who come to you who have this manner, but put more great trust in your honor than in your covetise, and do not open it foolishly but carefully from him whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken and lost; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health is converted; and whoever helps to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in speaking of chapters, according to that which is before or of the fire cautery, that I have devised for you from the beginning until the end, so that you may find it more easily than that of which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Dou chief plein d’aigue: The head filled with water
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease affect adults except for children, and most of those who have it die; and from what I can tell, it is better to ease the pain with treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with water, and the head grew heavy every day until it couldn't be held up; and because of the moisture, he thought he was going to die, and this moisture came together so that it entered between the bone and the skin, between the armpit and the bone; and the ovraige is so great that the moisture enters between the bone and the skin, and the abscess is small, that you cut a large opening in the head; and also far away as we have seen, until the moisture runs; and see this form of the spitball:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has broken the bone and you see the joints of the skull open on each side, and the fluid jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not close again: then you should make three incisions in the shape of a cross on the skull:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the bandages and powders, put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and allow the head to heal equally, and feed the patient dry meat made from moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you observe or opening the great part of the abscess, and the assembly of the sharp one; for it is not before; nor behind; nor on the right; and neither on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the place where the abscess opens, and the filling of the sharp one, and go according to what you can do; and guard so that you don't cover the artery; and come flur of blood, so that the patient dies from pain and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	in conclusion
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease called "cataract" in the eye or nose, and the disease is old, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last cure is that of cauterization with that which will cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary, therefore, when you have covered the eyes, that the patient should raise his chin; after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's hair from all of it; then look where the vein runs, and the roots of one and another are after the ears, and they are raised; then sign the roots, then cover them on both sides with an aggressive string made of two pieces, until the cutting comes up to the bone, and this is done by the thick part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, close the spatium off the artery and the cap over it, carving also as I must on the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is capped, let it continue to flow upward continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then measure the quantity of the space of III inches, then sign off and cut to the bone; and what needs to be put out there is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to how the patient can tolerate it, and the refilling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no wound, then strain the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient catarrh comes, and for the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and ancient dry diseases and similar things, and it is medicated by the methods of medical treatment and all that does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient scratches his hair from his temples, and hears the artery opening in the temple, for it opens well with its tapping, and is little closed except in some men who are too cold; and if it is closed, then the patient's neck is stripped of some cloth, then he rubs the place with no rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula where this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then turn it up as if pinching it, and remove the threads that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the tip of a hook, then cut it off from that part according to the quantity of II lines.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then neither does the sun shine on all things.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	If it is not cut, then neither does the sun shine on all things. And let there be a large artery, so that you tie it in two strong threads of silk, so that decay does not come before the time of the wound's outbreak, and decay comes from the blood; then cut off the surplus between the two threads at that same hour, and then, if you see, then cauterize with cautery cut to the bone as long as the head is cut; and this is the oevre of the muedre, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to end moisture; for what is more powerful than that aid for moisture?
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or let there be a cotton plug placed in the artery to stop the flow of blood; and when you remove it, then treat with dry medicines that make charcoal, and with tents, as long as he is healthy; and if there is no aid for the artery, so that you have to cut off by cauterizing, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have any present, so put your finger on the place as long as the blood is frozen, and raise the place of cold water as long as the blood stops, and is drawn out as it should be; and the muedre and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with a sharp knife from both sides, but let the knife be well sharp so that it can bear longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two tools a space of an inch, and then when you have cut across the two ends, and you put on hot iron as long as it comes to the bone, and bend the vein in two ends; and are distant between the two shoulders because it is not souded from this cautery all through; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes flow down from the veins that are above the base of the skull, and this hot liquid does not benefit from any medicine that is applied to it, and you see the face of the sick person turn gray, and feel or movement so as if he were cold; and if the hair of the papilla is weak and moist so that the hair falls out, and the papilla is burned, and scarred by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his hair or forehead; then make three cuts equally along the length of the forehead; and let one of the cuts be like two fingers all the way down to the nose, and the others like two ribs above the cheeks, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are above the cheeks; and remove your hand from between the two jaws, and let each wound be as much as three fingers wide; and arrange a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for him to suck up the blood, then pour the sputum out of both sides where this form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is to be made on the temple up to the second incision; and peel off all the hair that is between the two cuts down to the bone, then do the same from the middle of the first cut up to the other second one, and then remove this sputum:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If one drinks in the first cut the instrument that is called "culteller", and is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is blunt, not sharpened, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge toward the back at the end, and the edge is blunt toward the bone, and drink it so that in the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And tie all the vessels that descend from the top at the end as the incision is continuous until it reaches the center, and then the other part does the same in the middle cut; and then remove the hair evenly, and express the blood; then put into each cut a cloth of old linen, and put on drapes wet with wine and oil and honey, and keep that the abscesses do not come; and on the third day unbind it, and there is much water, then wash it with cold water, and there is salt; then dry it, and put ointment of basil with oil of roses, and other cures for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	let the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is a catarrh in the head by custom, and you see that the hairs are tense and small, and blur the sight, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and where it chief hurts there is pain that comes suddenly; then know from these accidents that those matters and that catarrh do not come but from many veins, and the cure that it brings is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to rub his forehead well, then make a wide cut across the forehead, and another that is large under it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you begin the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make an incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when one cries; and when the bone is exposed, then dip all the blood in a sponge, and then cover between the II lips of the cut with cotton wicks, and moisten them with vinegar and oil, and be careful not to burn the aposteme; when it has been extracted, then you should rub the bone until it begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, which cause chills.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take II parts of flower of wheat, and III parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to stop the spread of gangrene.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the aching in the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that causes an aching in the ears is one of the IV things: grain, beast, stone or similar thing like iron; seed, like seeds, peas; fluid-like thing like water and easily moving and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it aching in the ear is a stone or another thing that does not fit into the ear, and does not get stuck in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then distil no drop of purple oil or oil of sesame, but administer extraction; and when it comes to fidgeting, stop up the nostrils with pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth times comes through with this treatment; and if it does not come through, the patient is given extraction with fine tweezers, from which this form is derived:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes through with tweezers, it is good; if not, the patient is given extraction with a fine scalpel of small double-edged blade; and if it does not come through by this means, then take a piece of air from near the ear lobe very firmly, and stop what is inside the ear with soft wax so that the sound cannot enter with the air; then the treatment should be successful, because many times comes through as we have said; and if it does not come through in some way, then hold the glans in the hand, and place a tool on it which is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the glans against a stone or something, and treat.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not come to all these things that we have said, then you hurry to split the ear as well as the abscess and spasms; and the way of the split so that you do first to heal the patient of the cerebral, and draw blood according to the measure of his virtue, then put the patient between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small split in the root of the ear to fat where it depends; and let the split be also as a moon, until you come to the stone, then split the bone according to your power, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is stuck and it swells, then administer extraction; and if he cannot come out, then administer a delicate sputum with this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and incise that seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make this while you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many attempts; then extract it with gentle pincers and on the suckers, as we have said, so that the extractions are controlled.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	So that with the ear the patient should use a sneezing of the first condition, and broadly wrap the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be sitting on that ear where the drip is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if she sits well like this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if she does not sit well like this, take many times the seed according to its length and slight movements, and heat it slightly by the fire; and put into the patient a little piece of her ear, and press upon it from the other side, and make a hole in the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease to make that hole with the seed until all the drip has gone, and then let her sit all right; and if you see this, take a bit of seed, and dip one of the seeds into the fire, and the other head take from the fire as long as that seed burns; then remake the other holes with other seeds until all the drip has gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal's tooth, if it is small, as a flea or similar, treat it as we have described in the division; but if it is a large tooth, extract it with tweezers, and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of earworms, when you treat them as we have described in the division and in the treatment of distillation, and the cure does not help, then you should look at the ear in the light of the sun: if there are no worms, extract them with fine tweezers, and if there are none, take hold of the hair by which it is attached.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And cut the top of the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, and then suck out the content; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to draw out, so they stop up the cotton tube as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out with force as we have said, so you administer distillations that the old ones experienced in the lancing of worms, and you will find them where the treatment of distillations is; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear on all this instrument, from which here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if there is silver or gold, they are drenched in the small holes, and above them to distil; and to press into the distilling in the instrument of brass, which you will see well, and if you have a razor and wrap the cotton tip forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you will see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube is in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand with timidity until the oil is distilled or flowing from the ear; and let the patient smell it inside, and let the distillations be a little heated on the fire as they are distilled in the ear; and guard that they should not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the support of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perforations in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the support of a wound, or a splinter inside the ear, and such supports sometimes completely come out of the ear, if one cannot see them; and they never cause any harm, and one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	This, then, which comes out completely if one cannot see it, is of great damage in many conditions, and in this one can see that you should place the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has completely done all this hair of which there is this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be smooth and thin in front and behind all over, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the operation is a splinter or a hook inside the ear, if one holds it closely, and the handle lightly, until this splinter is completely out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ulcer is fully formed in the ear, then take a fine, light razor and heat it slightly; then put it where the cork of the ear is.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if you feel the ulcer that the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce it lightly and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to its width, and wet it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make no attempt until the wound is healed, or take a tent and wet it with rosewater, and powder it with vitriolic broomiate; and if you see that the ear runs, let it be so that you remove the tent and move another tent wet with beeswax, which has been made with rosewater and wax, until the discharge is dried up; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the pain which are to treat the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take the root of a plant and let it dry out, then place it on top of a vitriol (a type of mineral) with tweezers or pins, so that it is exposed to the vitriol's vapors.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled, then cauterize them with a small, sharp cauldron, and let the cautery rest after the incision has been made; and often peel them, so that nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
de la gresle	of the grayish-green substance
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Maitres fois viennent en papier des eaux une choses que semblent gresles en sa forme et en sa durece, et par ceu est ceste maladie apelee "grandine", et est une assemblee de moisteur grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est tels: pren garde se li grandine se mute d'une part et d'autre, et c'est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donc dou large, puis l'escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come in papers of waters an things that seem gralesque in its form and in its durece, and for this the disease is called "grandine", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and under; the ovraiges are such: take care if the grandine mutates from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; cut then broadly, then scorch each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and wrap it up. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the fracture is large, so the assembly has a seam, and cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ovraiges restore it soon enough and leave scars.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the aching is descending from the ear towards the part above, then turn the paper over, and let the ache be at a pinch, and the cop and press on both sides; and if the paper is dislodged by the incision, that does not cause any harm; and when the ache has been copped, then pour on the salt water, and cure the place from which it comes as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is an acne that is produced in the form of paper webs above, and this happens more often to young people than to others, and grieves their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hurry to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep on them, and their webs are moistened by the sweat that increases and changes the appearance of the acne that is formed in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the shoulder to your side and feel the extension between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of this treatment is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in a circular shape according to the quantity of extension between each part, then put it on him; and press with your hands from one side to the other, so that the extension is gathered into the circle; then cut through the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, making a slit no larger than the wound at the base of the vein; and cut the skin completely until you reach the extension; and in several positions the extension comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	So take away all the cloth between your hands at the back, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it is well spread out; and be careful not to twist in the slit, so that you do not come to the fat, or you will tear it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Et s'il n'éxécute pas en l'encouragement de la fendure, si à grand-peux la fendure plus facilement qu'il appert; puis l'extrait si com nous avons dit, puis mouille drapels en aisin et en aigüe, et met sus le lieu, et extrαι des bidelz.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind seige and put on in order to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the apothema of the hot steam, if the healer with salves soothes as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the hairs of the papers are too short that nature allows, and they are awake, if they hurt the eyes, and cause ways of sickness as usual tears and softens the papers, so that it is a cause of destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to four manners: or by cautery with fire, or by medicine according to this one that it is before, or by chapistry of cautery, and is done or by incision and suturing or by cuts, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aiguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si à tielle qui a mestier c'on cope grant quantité de la Papiere selonc ceu que li Papiere est mollifie; puis fent à tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et commence des lou grant larmier jusc'à petit; et soit li une des fendures prés des poilz naturez en la grossesse d'un raiz, puis boute l'oncine en l'un des II angles dou ceur, puis l'escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres à une couture d'une aiguille à tout fil de laine subtil, et essuie le sang, et fais aerdre la superfluité des fils sur les II sorcelz à tout aucunes choses gluantes, si tu vois faire ce; et si ce non, si n'en ayés cure, puis laisse la couture et les fils jusc'à III jours ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sans couture de choses sèches et contraignantes, car li Papiere se relève au soudement de la plaie et l' rassemblement de li, mais li couture est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c'est ouvraiges sens paor; et si à une autre maniere: et est que tu signies la Papiere d'une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons contéit, à III oncines désévrez selonc la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then cut this one which rises to small forces evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, then take an awl or he has a thread, and bottle it out of shape; and bottle another thread more than the big tear, and the second thread less the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have tied it together, as we have told you, then assemble the two lips of the wound with a suture, and treat it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so assuage it with cerot and similar ablation; and there is no chance that the hair of the paper are changed: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the suturing on one side and on the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, and the dressing has a certain strength, then cure it until it is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they can no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two toes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute un fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l'un et l'autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordenez en la chasse l'autre fil souef de soie briément, et noe les chef dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c'est uns ovraiges souef et menus, puis boute l'aguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hospitalement tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s'il en a un ou deux ou trois ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et s'il est chassé, il est traité et les poils ne viennent pas en lui, si tu chasses la chasse au désordre à tout le fil que tu as ordonné, tant que la chasse vient fort du trou dessus et que tu la vois par la vision de l'huile; alors si tu chasses la chasse et le fil, et ferme l'huile et le laisse là II jours ou III, tant que les poils s'enracinent en leur lieu et naissent le cheveu ; et si les poils sont petits, si accompagnent un poil long des chevilles naturez, et soient enlevés avec celui où tu le laisses, tant qu'ils soient eslongez et puis l'enlève.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the decay of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil decay, comes about in the oil, there are two ways it can happen: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from a wound, or surgery, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment in this is that you split that suture, and free the lips from it, and put linen strips inside, and leave it until it is healed; and it is not right that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use of softening things, such as fenugreek; and water or alcohol infused with seeds of flax are cooked, and olive oil is melted and mixed into it, and a tent is wrapped around it, and treat it like that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you take care that it does not heal in a way that is not good; and the following treatments that we have said are not right to use in this disease, so that it does not come back in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the cart that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is dislocation, which is really called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the path of the needle in it is that you squeeze a pin, as if it had two threads, and let it enter the neck, and the thread comes out on the left side so much to the right that it enters the cart; then are the cart above all the pin, and the cope to the wide spud.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it is convenient, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make II cuts where the costs are within the paper; and let the II ches of the II angles of the incision that you have copied, and let be made an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as that of a letter which has not "I griesche"; then remove this cart, according to the quantity that its costs are out of dislocation, from that which insues the paper, then remove the II separated parts, and the cost of one thread of wool; then the cure of what we have said about the mollifying medicines, and of tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de couture ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fendu re plainne desoz les poils des papieres, et selonc ce qui est ci devant; puis déploie entre les deux lévres d'une tente, si com j'ai dit; et il faut faire l'ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres apareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malade aussi, selonc ceu qu'il i convient d'ovraige et d'estrumens em plusors dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de couture ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fendu re plainne desoz les poils des papieres, et selonc ce qui est ci devant; puis déploie entre les deux lévres d'une tente, si com j'ai dit; et il faut faire l'ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres apareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malade aussi, selonc ceu qu'il i convient d'ovraige et d'estrumens em plusors dispositions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this paste is made at home in such a way that the paper on top is boiled with oil white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you take the point of a razor and scorch the paper, lifting it up; and let it fall onto small pieces of sponge, not too sharp nor too coarse, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp sponge that burns the oil; and make your incision, which you peel off the assembled one, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal all that is assembled, and never use in salt water and soft water and vinegar; then put between the paper and oil a piece of linen, and put wet wool on top of the oil; and after three days use of the collar and pastes until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I understand that the nail has two appearances: it is either nervous and resembles strong sinew, or it lacks nerves but resembles frozen white moisture; when touched with fire and worked with a pincers, neither can stand it; and both appearances begin to shed tears, growing larger and larger until they obscure the whole vision, all light, and all movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incising is such that the patient places his head on the stone, then he opens the nails; and you hold paper in your hand, then you twist the nails with small doubles, and raise them up; then take an awl, and there put a hair of horse, or cow, or bull, and thread it very firmly; and double the point of the awl a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce it all the way through, and tie the nail with a thread, and raise it up, and peel off at the root the skin which remains after the lard, so that by incising there does not come out the course of tears usually; and never is the nail attached to the bone alone, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin from the lard, so that this is its form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l'incision giete en l'oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc'a l'autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu'il i covient tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And make sure that the needle does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of tar into the wound, and a colander made of lint, and leave it until the next day; then cure him as much as he can be healthy.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And re-set the nail carefully above it, and if you see that it is getting thinner and the root is pressing down, then distil from your mouth into the oil a colander made of lint and red oil and a little thread, and stop the oil until the next day; then start the other work again according to this same method until it is all healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to it in the oil, as an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the abscess if it is healthy, then continue the work as before until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts it greatly in the oil due to great harm, then hold it for a moment, and cut off a part of it so that tears do not come out; then distil into the oil a red tincture which is made of lead oxide.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	the flesh that grows on the apple
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of certain men some flesh that grows on the apple never turns red, and covers the prune and holds it tight with paper and binds it strongly; and looks like a rose of a thistle; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in oil, then works the flesh, and cuts all of it off completely at once with sharp razors, and you must not blur the oil with the work; and let the incision of the spine that we have said in incising the nail and with small forces whereon one ostees the toothpick, as the form shows after this chapter; and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is cut off, then put oil of seed or you distil red tincture and similar medicines corrosive, and put cotton with a bit of oil to it so that it is assured of an abscess; and if he does not delay anything, and the hot one comes up to him, and you doubt about hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure hot abscess from soothing hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way the flesh that has been ajusted in oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the way by accident, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the members are suffering from this work.
des voines des eulz	of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red that are covered on the oil, and tolerate the sight of its work and weaken the oil every time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	is therefore necessary that you look at the first one that you notice the oil, because sebel is, and is clear, and there is no other disease for sebel than lou sebel; so then let the coil in a certain way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those voines entirely according to its wisdom, and make the oncines subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And two or three times per degree according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And two or three times per degree according to this form: then, with care, those venose subtilely, and pour out blood after another hour, until you can remove the venese from the oil; and be careful not to bruise the oil at the tips of the spatula, and perform this work before noon when the sun is hot, and be very careful in your work so that you only touch the venese; and when you have done this, if you distil into the oil green and red vinegar to spoil what is delayed of the sebum.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to coiled all of this in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and is assured of the abscess getting hot again; then start again according to this method which is before until it is well; and this is the way of coiling:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	I will address the fistula only: when you treat it with fire cautery and medicine as I have described above, and it is not healed, then cut open the abscess, let out all the moisture that is there, as far as the bone;
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument with which it was deformed; and it is called "spiky head", and let it be made smooth like a file, as it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the bone's corrupted place, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little so that you can feel that corruption has been removed; and do this once, then return to applying drying medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the loins are tight and the belly is round, and if the cors of the bowels is tight as well, remaining so for forty days, and if it does not become swollen or inflamed, no bad accident will happen to him, except that he must return the fistula to the hole from which it came, according to this method: you must discover the bone a second time with an iron awl, and with bitter medicines; when discovered thus, take hold of the iron nail at three angles, and make the hole narrow up to the top as much as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If the loins are tight and the belly is round, and if the cors of the bowels is tight as well, remaining so for forty days, and if it does not become swollen or inflamed, no bad accident will happen to him, except that he must return the fistula to the hole from which it came, according to this method: you must discover the bone a second time with an iron awl, and with bitter medicines; when discovered thus, take hold of the iron nail at three angles, and make the hole narrow up to the top as much as you see here. Then place the awl on the delicate part of the limb, and remove your hand from the oil pot, then turn it completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain in his arm; and when the medicines dry up, if the char has hardened the loins, the material will go to the arm; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hair is completely removed from the whole head, and there comes no difficulty in putting on a turban, nor any reduction, if you leave the patient; then treat him, then put vials over it, filled with oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and myrrh, and draw out the oil, and apply the plaster of oil to bandages and drapes; and the way to use the drapes is that you squeeze the drapes enough soft, and double each one in four, and then put it on top of another according to how much hair there is needed; then draw out the oil from above a hard bandage, and begin again with the vials to suck without hurting; then take off the vials and leave the oil drawn out day and night, and it will be relaxed again; then take off the bandage after the day and night, and if you see that the oil is coming back, it is good; if not, then begin again with the plaster and drapes and bandage and vials until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the tearing of veiled cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the disruption comes in the veiled cloth, then open it up, and comes forth as paper so much like grain of resin, and can be seen; therefore, if you cover it up, the ovations are such that you push a needle into the root of the part just above, then push another needle where there is double thread from the part of the armier; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement; then take the double thread and tie one part of the uve around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put wet oil on the other uve; and leave it until the thread rubs with the uve, then treat the oil with soothing things as long as the wound is healed; and never does the wound become restrained by the uve each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have a good appearance, then pierce them with a thin nail that comes out perfectly from the oil, and cut off the moist albus and pull out the hairs, and leave it for a while; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only a kind of oil that is mixed together, resembling water descending, and is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the ovary is such that you place the patient on a padded seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it up as you see the oil rise towards the hairs; then let it fall, and do not cut off the light, and observe how the hair looks like water; and if it does not descend, know that it is water, and let the oil-like substance appear in the same way as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatula and apply it to the corneal membrane with the help of the continuous connection with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bow rises; and when it is released, pour it into hot oily honey or water or fenugreek that has been boiled and honey, and cure from another cure as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of needles in the incision, and what is appropriate to pierce; so that it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is appropriate that you place the patient between your hands, away from sunlight, and press the oil firmly; then take the instrument called 'almagda' in your right hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; and then bring the tip of the instrument gently to the edge of the corneal membrane in the small area next to the tear, then turn the instrument back again so that it enters the empty space; and the measurement of the path of 'almagda' should be at the perfect measure of the space from the plum pit to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of oil. Then you will see the bone in the paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument at the level of the astringent water, then express one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is seated now, then see the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and then he raises the second way with force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently extract the almagas by turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little gold in it, and take it away from that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place on the other hand the stopped oil or another moistened oil in oil rosin and abundance of wax, and bind with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our kind, let us put on a common thread with abundance of wax.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagas cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men whose hairs are too coarse, then you must press the instrument that is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so now the connective tissue, and do not go too far with it, but make it small, then pour the liquid in, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a bed coming, since he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be tied according to his disposition until three days; then take it out again in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put him back in the bonds until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, because he will go up quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	As the seventh day comes, you shall pour oil before the seventh day, and address it with that which soothes the throat; and when it is calmed down, then take off the veil and put it on his face, on the right side, to cover it for one day, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house a little by little, and turn to his side; and know that no doctors should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Land of Israel who told us that in our country it is said that one sucks water, but nevertheless I have never seen this in our land, nor have I ever read about it in any books of the old ones; and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the shapes of the elements of earth, for whoever does not know them will see them; and they are properly made of air.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this middle part be at an angle of three angles behind.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder above the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None are born or born various shoulders, of which there are none that seem scorpions at the mouth of the foot; and if there are such, or he has an enchiaved shoulder from a fox's fur, and a good-colored shoulder.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those shoulders that are souef and not enchiaved, it is appropriate that you make the patient sit between your hands toward the sun; and operate his nose, and put the oncins on those shoulders, and tighten them well; for if you hold this small sharp tool of one side, as long as you know that this shoulder is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if you open all the instruments of the subtle light, so that it does not stay anything; and if he comes up to you, or an abscess, so the scar, as it should; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them, so that the scabs are stained and all the shoulders are boned, then cut or born easily and quickly or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the newborn is sick, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healthy; and if the moisture pierces in such a way that there is no room for the instrument to come: then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread about as thick as a finger, and tie both hands together with a space between each string of about one inch or less; and place the baby's chin on the thread in his hand, and pull it by sniffing it until it comes out through his nose into the mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and this is a light task for him who does it; then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them one after another while keeping them together like us who are tying the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make sure that the new thread has corrupted the thread, then treat the wound, wash the blood, and moisten the wound with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place as before; make sure for III days or more, until the ointments have corroded whatever is delayed from the thread; and then put a piece of plaster on the wound for some days until it is well, and if there is need to use dried medicines, do so; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, by which we distil oils and medicines into the ear:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Make it of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and conduct it so; and if you see, make a closed tube, and this instrument is flat for purging the head; and I always have at hand to the head so that it can be held when oil or any liquid is heated.
de la char sor le neis	of the horse's shoulder from the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times in the neck of the horse a disease appears that is called "telul", and it grows and becomes very large, so much so that it can be seen with the eye; and for this it is necessary that you chop at the beginning, and all the bone, then put on fire the cauterizing medicine; and if you delay to chop it until it is very large, if he has hard color, of poor feeling: if not touch him with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when you chop it once, great evil comes to the sick person; and the abscess is touched by light touching, not by red color, and you see that he can be all chopped, if he vacates the sick and chop him without fear, and cure him with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the baby is born, cut and cure.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a child's teething begins in one of these cartilage joints, it brings little profit, except for those few who benefit from it.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a child teeths in one of these joints, it is necessary to cut and cure it; if you see that the wound is fresh throughout all its length, and then join the two lips together with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are torn on one side or the other, you must scrape all parts with salt and dragon's blood powder, and burn them with resin; put these powders on a piece of plaster of strength or another kind of plaster, then leave it to itch by itself; and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to stitch up an injury is this: either with needles, as we have spoken of in the belly-stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With a sharp knife, cut off the tips of the lips, which are like grain, smaller and larger; then cover them with cotton and bind them tightly; and then employ the acid of vitriol on them, as long as the wound is still open; and then wash it thus, and dry the place well until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times have the teeth been pulled out with tweezers, which the old people called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them with tweezers, and cut off at the root, and let the blood run; then apply acid of vitriol or other drying and binding powders to the wound; and if this tooth comes back after the incision, and many times comes back, if it is pulled a second time, and cauterized: if it does not come back after the cauterization, and that are the forms of instruments to pull.
des sordens	of the order
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	of the teeth
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth from the pain that you delay drawing it as much as you can, because there is no excuse for not doing so; because this is a very high substance until we have no excuse to draw it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	And then when the sick person is hard to draw out, it is necessary that you are firm with the teeth of the hollowers.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Several times the pain of the sick person has ceased, and he thought that the tooth was good, and made the tooth pull with a good tooth; and nevertheless the pain does not cease because of this, until the illness is removed, for we have already tried to do this to these patients; and when you are certain about the tooth of the hollowers, it is necessary that you scrape the tooth between your teeth very well with a hard instrument, then let it move back and forth, a little at a time, until it is well pulled, then tighten the pliers. And let the head of the sick person be in your good lap, and hold him firmly so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After pulling the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take one of these tools and put it in from each side gently, and move it so as to have done so at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if his jaw is pierced and filled with meat, then you must stuff it with cotton where the hole is; and if he is held carefully with pliers so that he does not break when removed; and it is necessary to wash well around the gums in order to clean out the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you must take care not to break it, and there remains a part of it, and returns to the patient by the mischief of the root with greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you must take care not to do so as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through his haste and boldness, often breaks the jaw without any consideration for what we have described; but brings about many things by the quivering of that great disease for the roots from which they come, or by the jaw itself that they break, as we have often wanted; and when the jaw is drawn out, if you wash the place with wine or oil or wax; and if it bleeds, stop the flow of blood there, so that it often happens, I say, as soon as one stops the bleeding with vitriol.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, so that they do not mute the first tenons, are long in length and large in width, so that they do not double up when you draw the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be big limbs so that they do not bend when drawn, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth for holding.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root moves when drawn, it is necessary that you put cotton wet with oil on the joint or two or three days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the joints are smooth, for then the pliers that are called "algefri" seem to bite; and let them be made inside like a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the tooth completely around the root, and put the instrument that is called "althali", that is to say file, so this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be big and strong so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the tools, from which the shapes come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two rays, from which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the rasa
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong so that it does not break, and know that many tools of the dens are; and also other tools, which are not counted; and the master subtile tries out his own tool by himself according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are some diseases where the old teacher does not teach a tool for the variety of them; and if it does not break the chariot or the other bones, on which he will lie, if he seeks the tools that suit him, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be large and firmly holding the bone so that it does not escape but can hold and remove; and then return it to the medicine's place suitable for this, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, then reapply all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not seem to be in line with the natural shape of the jaw, and their form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the roots are coming out after the tooth, and they are not in their right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then cut off; and if it is connected with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is similar to a small beak, and which is made of iron obtained from a smelter:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits and fits tightly because of the hard tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then take a file of this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime whereon one makes needles; and in lime the tooth pokes and pokes with his hands lightly every day so that it does not move until it has cut; then the plane at the end to all razor, and its edge is too sharp and bleeds the tongue, so that it is necessary to sharpen the sharpness until it is even, so that it bleeds the tongue or corrupts the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth moves away
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the tooth moves forward with percussion or chewing, and the patient cannot press upon anything he chews until he has urinated, and you have treated them with restringent medicines, and this does not help; then it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because silver wire becomes green and rusts, but gold wire never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you notice any gaps, take the thread and double it over the healthy teeth on either side, then place the bridges between the teeth, if there are one or more, until you have carefully cleansed them up to a healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the covering up to the part where you started, and squeeze your hand gently and carefully so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the chaps of the thread to a pair of pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and set it so that it does not break the tongue; and then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it falls, or the thread rubs, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves this way all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the joint of the II sound teeth, and the II bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth looses, if one puts it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not meddle in this anyone who is not wise and patient, and never makes the form of a tooth of an old cow, and puts it back in its place where it has fallen short, and holds it as we have said, and delays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the ring of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No times is the ring of the tongue that comes from nature, which must be thus: or by accident of a sore wound; and the ovraige is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and loosen the tongue; then copper the large nerve, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it is hard or soft, and it is sudden from a sore wound, so you bite it with the hook and copper the large nerve; and keep that the cut does not become too perfect, for the artery that is nearby; and when you have done so, take off the water of rose and thus, or cold water, then put desoz the tongue a piece of linen; and the loosing li malaides every night, so that the leus cannot soder.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood flow comes on, then put vinegar over it; and if he goes up again, then cauterize him with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for that; and then treat him with other treatments until he is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a small spot of black or white or hard, then the patient should not feel it or touch it, for that is cancer; and if it declines towards blotchiness, and there is moisture, then pour oncene onto it, and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if he goes up again to your opening, then put vinegar over it until it is dried up, then return to your opening as long as you pour it all out; then raise his head and neck, and treat him with other treatments until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	the abscesses of the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "amandres"; and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, if they do not heal, be careful: if it is an abscess that is hard and white, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either for fear of causing blood loss; but let it be as long as it is quiet, and then you will take it away, or else it would burst by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, then you shall have ready the instrument to cover it over, but first see that the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the sick person sit in the sun, and their knees be straight, and they open their mouth and place their tonguet between their hands, and press all the instrument against it, so as this is the form; and be of silver or gold as fine as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And then press the tongue to all this instrument, and you will see the abscess, take the sharp knife and stick it in amber, and carry it up higher than you can; and do not tie any strings with it, then cover the instrument, from which comes the form, which seems a great strength; and yet their heads are bent and one above another, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron where or elsewhere:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, take the cope with pliers, from which comes the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be it cut on one side and not on the other; and when you have copped one of the ambers, kop the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and repeatedly gurgle, and if blood comes up, gargle with cooked pomegranate juice, or leaves of wild mint, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then treat it as long as he is well; and never let there be more than two ambers in the throat, that is, the two ambers that we have mentioned above.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, which is to say a small abscess; and I had it very tightly closed so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway that was blocked, nor eat or drink, and she would have died if she had waited another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had risen two rain-falls through the two openings from which it was draining.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I quickly ran and put one of the suckers on it, then took a deep breath, and poured out a good portion of water; then I put another sucker in the other opening from which it was draining, and squeezed its tongue; after that I filled the sore with water, and it let out only a little bit of blood; and so the passageway in her throat became unblocked, and she began to drink clear water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess broke out again, and filled the space that I had cleared out, until it was very large; then I bandaged it and cauterized it inside her throat: so it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the swelling goes down from the eye, and it is gone and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, and you see that the abscesses are calm and thin, then you should cut them; and if they are round and assembled and are not far away; and they are bloody or of a red color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary then, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its bleeds and lontness, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the language to the instrument which we have mentioned above; and then put the incision into the eye, and turn it around, and cut with II instruments that I have said in the incision of II mandrels.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; because if you do so much, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two mandibles, and heal until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has doubt about covering, then you must use fire cautery on the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patient put his head in your lap, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and confound it with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by using the movement of this instrument, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let a cap stand on his head where the medicine is put, as if it were a spoon, and place the instrument we have said or fire cautery on all the medicine on the uvula; and let the patient lie down on his side so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and hurt him; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the uvula for half an hour, until you see it turn black and the medicine taste good; and if you need to refresh the cautery, dip the cotton in the medicine and put it back on the uvula; then let it dry, and after three or four days rinse it out with cold water, and cure it with gargling until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, but only the cauterization. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and ysope and oreganum and rue and chamomile and avronne and other herbs, and put them all in a pot or some of them in I can, and put it there easily, and make it boil; and the pot is well glued with strong earth, and add an instrument to it according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it is of silver or gold, and let one of the shoulder-blades be in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises through the canal, until the urinary bladder is dead; then start again often, until the urine dries up, and guard against doing this at the beginning of the appearance of the abscess, because many things happen there; and do not do this except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog and put a nail in the mouth of the sick person so that the mouth does not get too hot; for the nail does not let the harsh vapor hurt the mouth, and it is good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Several times it goes into the throat of a fish or nothing; so it is necessary that you take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if what is not opened for you and is pushed back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the sick person vomit so that his food is cooked in his stomach; perhaps then the thing comes out by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry bread mooch; and you tie the sponge to it, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, if it hurts, then draw hard; and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take an instrument of plunk according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And so the instrument is curved at the tip to allow it to enter the throat more easily, and the tip is raised higher; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that none of it comes off, or push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, for this is where the movement occurs; if he swallows it, or pulls it out far enough all at once, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine that helps the blood, as I said in the division, by way of remedy with medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient to the sun, so that you press the tongue to the instrument which I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, or pull it out with small tweezers that are sharp.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a dog's tooth, and put it in the throat of the patient, then pour or blow the tooth so that it burns, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient's plague is of water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, and wrap it around the patient's mouth, and let it fall into his throat, and move it with his hand often; and if soon after that the patient feels the water, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then suffocate the patient with sage, using the instrument that I spoke of in the дымation of the wound; do this many times, because it will not choke.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of the fumigation is that you squeeze the blood from the nose or it has black bloody nosebleed, and let the water drop into a container in the middle, and let the instrument come out; then pour your smoke, and let the patient put the top of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the blood; and the blood will now come out, and if it does not come out, then start the fumigation again many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty things and ale, and do not drink water; and then let him be well by this management.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument, so you can see if there is any, resembles claw-like tongs for getting into the throat; and has the appearance of a beak, and has sharpness like lime, so that whoever takes it does not let go; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Mouths of the appearance of an abscess are, according to this memory that comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in piercing and in cutting; and it is in two ways, one is in its own appearance, and from what it holds of moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where it is at the core.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess at the top is different from that at the foundation, and the abscess at the root of the jaw is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the bowels are dead according to their completion; and if to such that it is necessary to pierce when they are raw, and do not die according to their completion, as with an abscess that is a delicate joint.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from delicate joints, and one leaves it as long as it is pus-filled within, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, so that this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is in a principal limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is in the foundation, then one pierces it thus that it does not pus within, and does not become completely rotten, and so one does not perforate an abscess that has not digested completely, otherwise that which is in the foundation, that it does not pus completely within, and so it remains inside, and comes to a fistula; and cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	Et covient que tu saiches l'oure de la perforation de l'aposteme qui est meur selonc l'acomplissement, et c'est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l'amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l'aguisement dou chief de l'aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faiches seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l'aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n'a point de ploieure.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	And it is necessary that you know the time for perforating the abscess which is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the debate and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where there is more dependence on the abscess, and where it opens; and let the perforation be long for the body, and let the abscess be at the hands or feet, or in joints and in the sides and in the arteries, and in all of them equally where there is no plier.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the loin, so that you leave the puncture until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, so that you prolong the course of his coming out, and is plain of mud of ordure; and by chance harden the lips and his profundity of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the loin, according to what the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you prepare little abscesses, little perforations; and in great abscesses, great perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such that they cover the cure, and cover; when they have become as sheets, and are softened, so it is necessary to do as one does with bubles: and if there are such that they are split in three angles, and if there are such that one covers as a leaf of mirth, like abscesses of the angles; and if there are such that one makes a round cut, and other cuts and apparent covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Those who have no hair, like an abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you pierce it plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has a great amount of pus, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all the pus at once, but only some part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing more; do this again and again with great care, until all the pus is drawn out; but in any case, the patient's virtue is weak, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the patient with great caution and, when you have pricked your pustule, if the wound is small, apply linen or old cotton; but if it is a large pustule with many holes, insert a tent into each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut into the skin of the pustule and sewed it up, fill it with dry cotton or flannel without moisture, and leave it for three days; then open it, and dress it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the blood runs from the place you have pricked, apply cold water and often, and wet the cloth and put it over the running place;
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si l'écoulement de sang persiste, l'administrer un traitement et une cura, et les poudres que j'ai dit d'utiliser dans les mains comme il est décrit dans ce livre, et s'il s'agit d'un cas d'urgence, et la base de l'apoplexie est nerveuse, mettez-le sur des draps mouillés avec du vin et de l'huile chaude; et si c'est une apoplexie, et la zone est charnue, mettez-y des draps mouillés avec de l'eau et de l'huile, ou du vin et de l'huile froide pendant trois jours comme nous l'avons dit; puis essuyez l'apoplexie et le soignez selon les règles jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one must act before treating an abscess, and here is the ointment.
des soros	of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Of the small blisters, and are handled by us so that they are in webs, also like the shoulder of a sheep, and many have such appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such as birds; and some that are hard and bony to the knife, and there is no doubt that its artery does not do contrarily.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you experience all the instrument called "entrimoire", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if he makes a hole on top of the long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is voided, if he leaves the skin that contains the moisture, for it returns again when left alone; then dip in Egyptian wool, if there is any; otherwise, in water and salt, and employ the wound, and leave it until the next day; and if there is delay, go back to the remedy.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And so let us begin with the cotton, as we have said before, on the second day, and the tier, until you know for sure that it does not remain long in the night; then heal the wound with ointment suitable for it until it is well.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess continues to pus, then make the copse according to this form, long; and pour your vinegar, and burn all its edges with fire, and put all your cure on the coat where it is; and if the artery does not please you, then do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make of the abscess if it is pierced, and of the cutting and curing as I have said to you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the pierced abscess and the moist one, for they are lighter in blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or in the chief or in one of the old woman's furrows, and I found the abscess as hard and sharp and bleached as a stone, and could not break it; and if any had been struck by it, it would have done to it as if it had been struck by a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the top, those who come to the top of the children and the roots of the ears, let it be open all the time as much as possible in its place, so that the bow can come out; and treat them as is appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times have there been abscesses in the throat, and they heal, and then they break out again in other places, and they are infected, and one is infected with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its rib, as the knot and the abscess at the top, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in that which you see of good disposition in the neck, and it appears to the color of the flesh, and silent from each part and is not deep; if it is necessary that you chop it from above, and scorch it from each part, and are the two lips of the throat to one-half, if you need them, as we have said in abscesses at the top; and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and is not too thin, nor too deep, that your hands do not escape, and do not look too far forward, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you sew, put vitriolic acid on it, or some powder that clogs blood, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calm, and the wound is soft, and start to decay.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the pus has subsided, if you return to your work, until you have finished it all; then examine your index finger for any small scabs, and scrape and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a great vein of the scrofula in the root, it should only be cut at the root, but let it hang down by a strong double thread, and leave it hanging without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian olive oil, and then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, so that there is no delay because of its great extent.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and draw strongly, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have a surplus, pierce them so that they die; and pierce them as before said, depending on it, then set aside tenes with care and similar things, so that they corrode the one who is delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, heal it with oignon-juice.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old people used to speak of the scythe of the throat; but I never saw one in our country, and it is the scriptural word of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	A those who have squint, it is necessary that the split of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and one must not seek help from him, for all the veins and the main arteries of the sick person are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in the two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the throat channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the strangulation that comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we make three splits or four small splits from one side or through the quantity of the split of the blade, not in the cartilage; and these are such that they can be split so that there is no need for a chisel, and the knife is long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, then it is appropriate that he extends the skin of the throat to all length, then split the flesh as much as it comes to the jaw; and avoid the blood vessels from blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the medicine, as we have said; and is demonstrated by the section of the vein of the jaw that jumps out by the place that is broken, and by the absence of voice; and leaves the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by which one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with the flesh, and the whole tongue is under the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote blood flow, as long as it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one must not do this as long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect leaves him disabled.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then, take hold of the epiglottis lest the patient should be unable to breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and so it is preserved from death; and for this reason, the elder commanded that the wound should remain open as long as the evil of the disease had not passed, and it passed in three days or four. And then he commanded that the wound should be sewn up and healed, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a damsel take a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut off part of the chin; and I was called to cure her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had issued from it, and I know that she had not opened a vein or incised it further than the throat, and her veins were running out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed the wound, and treated it until it healed; and for the damsel there was only that she became hoarse from shouting, and returned to her normal state; so I said to myself that in the removal of the epiglottis I had no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large hernia in color of a blue, and is very common in women; and according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or naturally there is no gadget.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is resembling to fat us, and the other manner is resembling to an abscess that comes from us of the artery; and there is fear, and it cannot be done at all, if it is a small one, and test and search in all the intruder: if you find it as well as I do the fat, and it cannot be done at all, if it is cut, and treated so that it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are several ways to describe ourselves, all of which I will discuss in detail; and now it is appropriate that I make the entire difference between us and what is known.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and chills are in place until the boiling is passed and completed; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With you there is no heat or fever or pain, and it is good for your own self, which is of the same color as your skin, and begins in the same way as a seed does, and becomes large; and are according to these appearances, whether fat, or moist, and much of a color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of the body, it is necessary that you test and question first all the instruments called "entremessoires", according to what their form comes or the paste which is afterward.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way of testing the abscesses is that you squeeze or moister place that you find in the abscess, and turn your hand little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated into it, then let it be according to the size of the abscess; then remove the implement, and take care not to hurt.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture runs fast, that it be colored, if you do so with the others abscesses; and if after the implement does not come moisture, know that it is greasy, then do so in a cross form, and take it with pincers, and scratch it lightly from each side, and pay attention to where it lies so that you pull it out healthy along with the thread; and if you cannot pull it out healthy, then pull it by pieces so that nothing stays.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car s'il y a un retard, il revient souvent à nous par plusieurs fois; et s'il y a un léger retard, et qu'il ne te cause pas de douleur, alors emploie des poudres corrosives pour guérir la plaie, et tire la plaie, et met sur elle des choses apaisantes d'aposteme chaud, et soigne-le avec d'autres remèdes jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri; et s'il est grand, alors cout les II levres de la plaie, et soigne-le de celui qui cause le mal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it is opposed to you or another, then hurry and employ the place of vitriol powder, and let it stand for II days or III, until the wound corrupts, and pour on it the blood of the vein; and then return to what was delayed by the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the instruments used for insertion, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they are also like the needles from which we make sorcerers, and they are of yellow bronze, or iron, or silver, and they shine more than those which are blackened by lead; and they are of three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moins, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromessoires sont les aleines reponues en mainches, si que li malade ne s’en perdroivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mamelles, et aynz, et sembans leus; et aucune fois fait on i autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	The chief of these things that one does are sharp, and some of them do not cut more than on side, from which the skin is scraped so that the vein or nerve is not hurt; and these intrusive members are placed in many ways, so that the patient does not lose his senses at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium-sized, as you see; and one only uses them in their natural place, like legs, arms, breasts, and arms, and similar things; and one never uses another small instrument, resembling escorces of fists, according to this form, so that one stops the blood:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No time does the breasts of some men fill up when they begin to rot, as long as they seem to be breasts of women; and they become ugly and swollen, and those who should cure them, if it suits them according to this form from this line .b. to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	No time does the breasts of some men fill up when they begin to rot, as long as they seem to be breasts of women; and they become ugly and swollen, and those who should cure them, if it suits them according to this form from this line .b. to g: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound by soaking it, then join the two lips of the wound together to sew, and heal until he is well; and if his breast swells, and is amiable by its size so as it had been at women, if you make it in II ribs on top, by II apparently cuts; so that one should hold onto the other in the end of one and of the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and add what we said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until he is healed; and if he is not healed, or the incision is not all finished, so that the patient does not rest, or for the corrosion of blood, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton wicks soaked in corrosive ointment; then leave it to absorb the residue and fat, then heal him until he is well.
des apostemes des asselles	of the heels of the feet
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The scrotum of the testicles is treated with hard scabies or itchiness, and if there is moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the whole bow that is in the scrotum is empty, if employ a bandage of cotton wool, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment before it heals:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the scrotum resembles scabies, if treat it in the same way as we have said for the treatment of scabies wounds, and if the wound contains a bow, then apply fire cautery as we have described:
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is open, and the flesh is tight above it, so many abscesses come out of it, and all along there comes an escape and abscess; and if you feel it with your fingers, then you will feel pain; and if it is for the vein, then it goes to another place; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and more so when it is tight to the shoulders and to the neck and to other parts, and it is great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the artery is open and the flesh is tight above it, many abscesses will come out of it, and all along there comes an escape and an abscess; and if you feel it with your fingers, then you will feel pain; and if it is for the vein, then it goes to another place; and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and more so when it is tight to the shoulders and to the neck and to other parts, and it is great. So therefore, it is necessary to remove the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be removed, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, make a cut above the flesh; then turn the stomach with one hand, and carefully remove the artery from its threads, as long as it is uncovered; then stick a needle through from one side to the other, and strap the artery with a double thread according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples; then point the place between the two ties with an introducer until there is nothing there, and then remove the abscess; then apply the cure as mentioned above, until it is healed; and if the abscess is caused by the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold your hand with the part that you can get to the abscess on the skin, then stick a needle through from one side to the other, and there are two threads, so that you pull it from the opposite side; then tie the abscess, as I have said, or tie both parts of the thread to the two cheeks of the double thread; and if you doubt that the thread does not hold, then stick another needle through all the thread next to the first incision of the needle, and strap the threads in four places; then cut off the surplus with scissors, then strap the scar with medicine and leave what is tied. Then put a wet cloth on it, soaked in wine and oil, and apply cures of tar and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As well come they in the artery and in the vein, come they in the nerves when they are cut, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens to the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and it is I grief of the nerves, and its color seems the color of the flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is pulled forward, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely stiffened, but muting well on all sides, and does not go before or behind, nor up nor down, and the one who is in the joints does not come well with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction; and that which is at the head or at the front, it feels the skin to the scalpel.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the apostemes are small, if he has a nail, and copes it at its root; and if they are large, if he hangs it on an axe, and then scorches it, then the bone is taken away and the wound is sewn up, and the cure is made until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	The large bellies hanging down.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No time has passed without bellies and no other part of the body being affected, and this disease is called "mushroom" in appearance, and it is a subtle root, and a large one; and there are small ones and big ones; and I saw a man who had two bellies that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were flat, and ran moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI z., and the joints in the incision so that if you look at it, the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and has a subtle root; if cut with a wide scalpel, and let the cautery be on fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pois bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess that is inflamed, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound is fresh
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	if the appearance of the wound comes from fire cautery on a wound or cut by the knife, and it is on the abdomen and there are some boils, as it happens in other wounds, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind; and if it is by the cut of the knife and by the exit of the boil, the color of the abscess seems like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then there are many variations; and when one presses it to his two sides, then it turns back, and then comes back again, and perhaps it is stuck, and widens much at the entrance of the bath, and from strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et s'il est à cause d'humidité, c'est une chose légère, et il faut bien le presser dans ta main, ne le contraignant point ; et si c'est à cause de sang, alors ouvrez l'apothème gros et dur selon la quantité ; et si c'est à cause de vent, alors il est sur le tochon, et les ouvrages sont tels que tu veuilles considérer que c'est pour le sang de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou du vent.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	And if it is because of moisture, it is a light thing, and you must press it well in your hand, not constrain it at all; and if it is because of blood, then open the apothème large and hard according to the quantity; and if it is because of wind, then it is on the towel, and the works are such that you would like to consider that it is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or of the wind. If it comes that you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter there is doubt and fear, as I have told you before, or the chapitre of the apothèmes, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you command the patient that he dye his hair, and be extended all straight, then sign all around the bowel; then command him to let flow gently between your hands, then go around the place that you have signed all of the spatumile, then extend half of the appendix above all the large hook; then tie it with a strong thread, or a firm silk rope, and fasten it tightly; then work half of the appendix extended over the rope, and put your index finger on it, and feel the intestine; if you find it attached to the rope, then release it, and push the intestine towards the back of the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, then take it with the hook, and cut off its excess; and if the artery opposes or is against the vein, so go deep, then return to your work and take II needles, and push II fillets, and push the II needles around what you have made by piercing; then strain the appendix in IV places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it is putrid, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you cut it when it is thin and putrid, then cure what needs to be cured, and work the appendix as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what it deserves, and weld the place.
dou chancre	A cancerous sore.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of the appearances of cancer, and how it should be operated upon with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and we say that cancer is inherited in the marrow, and great care must be taken in the cure, and the old man says that when cancer is in place where it can be cut as cancer is in breasts, and in the milk, and in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, so one should not approach it, for I have never found one to be cured; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when they are in place where they can be cut as we have said, are that you never purge the disease of black bile; then make it well if it is manifestly full, then afire the disease with good fire so that the operation can be done; then pour your dung or cancer, and your hair on all sides, and the bone on all sides leaving nothing; and let the blood run freely, and press hard at your hand or at any thing, and if the cauterization contrary to the incision of the artery or vein makes the stain stop; then cure it with other cures until it is well.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	of dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	and cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	and cut in two parts. Cut a point and never cut so deep that it reaches the intestines when you push it in, and do not cut it so that it bleeds; then see if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: You should make the cut on the left side of the loins three fingers from the top; and if it is due to the liver, make the cut on the right side of the loins; and it is necessary that the patient lies down on the cut so that the excess does not flow into his weak loin; then pierce all the skin with the instrument and squeeze it out, and hold your hand over all the spine with your finger as if you were scraping something from a quantity of one thumb or more; then pierce the spine until the spine comes out clear, then push it in and take the instrument away, and that is the place of the water, then strain it, and pour out this instrument where there is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like an silver-colored snake, and is of air or light-colored leather, and has in the part of the nose a small hole; and where it costs on one side, there are III holes; and on the other side II, and on the other I; and the head is cut off so as to be like a feather, and this is the form of the incision which the scribes cut the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the tip is the instrument, so that when the instrument comes to water, it flows now onto the instrument; empty then half or a third of it, for if you empty more than this in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he leans toward death; but in order to empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient and his pulse mean, then hold the instrument and keep the water back now for the time that it stops at the syphil, which I have spoken of, so that you pierce according to this manner; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering that, and hold the water a little quantity; do not follow this any more, and keep yourself from foolishness as long as he does not stop but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the disease, and you put out a lot of water, if the doctor of the cemetery or sand is hot, and by sweating much or bathing in water and in the sun, and turning red from drinking; and the doctor of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There is no child born who does not have a foreskin, or whose foreskin is small, or which is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary that it should not pierce all the delicate skin according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put the foreskin of a soft leather on it, and bind and hold it like that for III days or IIII; and when he urines, if it is tight, let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he does not notice it at all, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The tongue of the patient is swollen; if it is medicated with a syrup, as we have said, it will shrink.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the swelling in their natural place are blighted, for there is no one who has the swelling at the top of the penis, so that they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come out up to the pubic bone, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The way to treat this swelling is so that the patient lies down on his back; then place the head of the penis and the scrotum as if they were a feather, so that the swelling strikes in the middle, as it should; and be careful not to cause pain from the blood that often comes, and if it happens, let the one who heals the wound treat it until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Several times the urinary bladder comes out in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are both malign and non-malign ones; so that you should squeeze them at 10 o'clock, and cut and clean them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on the circumcision; then cure with a fine ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bladder is malignant, of black color and pus, so that you should bring fire to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the bladder is in the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, so that you must remove the bladder that is inside first; and when it is sewn up, then cure the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you heal it all together, if the bladder is not properly secured, it will corrode and corrupt the skin of the penis and the testicles; so that you should cut off everything that is corrupted, then put honey and flour on it which is made from apple tree bark and dates, then cure with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood flow is severe, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the blood flow is severe, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: For dislocation of the testicles together with corruption; and if the foreskin at the root of the penis has been corroded and withdrawn, so that you pierce or conduct a cord from the scrotum, and urinate through it into the patient; and when the hair is removed from the head of the penis, which has occurred due to injury or an abscess, then it is necessary to scorch with the scalpel carefully, until the ligaments are loosed, and the foreskin is freed entirely from the penis; and if this is a difficult thing to consider, then scorch it with the scalpel at the root of the penis and the scrotum, and then carefully separate them, and place a thin cloth of linen wetted in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not an obstacle to the continuity of life if it is like other wounds; yet when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do it with greater care and more gently for the sake of health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their custom; and we have only obtained this knowledge through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greater part of the masters and the most worthy who make circumcision around the penis, and with force, and altogether a new thing; so it was that he who cut off the foreskin took care because there were two foreskins, and by chance if one of them was cut off, the other would be delayed.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it recovient coper, and is the pain double, and the cleansing that is done from the member is not assured to the tip; and by chance if the nail escapes the knife, it corrupts the work, and often there are such that they do not need Cleansing; and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mouthwashing that is done to all the thread-like lines I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the threads are cut as well below as above.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly in I all the lines; but that the thread be well twisted around the leather; and that the manner of the first work is so that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not force the thread tightly around the peg so much, and then let it relax in all the ways that you can; then let it rest between your hands straight, and re-point the forces between your hands or your fingers that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then bottle your hand to the peg and blow or curl, and turn it upside down as far as the line of the peg is; then mundify it well with the filth that is gathered there, then tie the thread double, then lie it away I pie to the other liien; and hold it by the two threads to the pulley and to the little finger, and tie between the II threads, then let go the breath above carefully and turn the head of the peg; then let the blood run poc and poc, for it is the mudder; and put powder on and on the powder I drapeil glued with a smell of cooked egg yolk mixed with rosewater oil and fresh water, and leave it there until the other day, and cure with another cure as long as he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for purification is this: both shoulders be soft and pliable, and the shoulders also be as long as even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the curings escape through incisions; therefore, it is necessary that you extend them to your finger, so that the leashes form an apoplexy; and equal them, and if you cannot hold them with your finger, then tie them with a bandage.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it is trespassing three days, and that which is dislocated at the root of the penis is inflamed, if you leave it until the apoplexy of the chaps is calmed down, and the scorching is done lightly; if you can move it so that you keep a distance from the part of the root, that will not harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the powder of things standing wound from the powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if it copes with the cure in excess, and it goes up, that will not harm; cure then, as we have said, as long as it is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retaining of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retaining of urine is caused by a stone in the kidney, or by frozen blood, or by bowels or chariot or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine does not pass, and you see it straining for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and let them be placed on their backs, and extend their abdomen from above their backs, and restrain the patient so that he can strain as much as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine passes; and if it does not pass, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must bring all the instruments that are called "syringe", which is this form: and let it be fine, light silver, like the feathers of a swallow; and let the cane be about a palm long and half, and let it be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of issuing urine so is that thou take I double thread, and tie at the end of the thread a bit of wool or cotton, and bottle the end of the thread inside the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and the bottle till at the end of the syringe, then oil or butter the syringe and egg white, and make the sick sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with oil wet and olive oil and water; then put lightly the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the jugulum; then bottle the syringe before jusc' to the bladder, and let the urine come jusc' to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order but that whomever thou guidest or she goeth it is twisted; then take the thread to all the wool tied and tied, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make run the urine; and begin again the syringe as long as the bladder be empty, and right the sick.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blistering or burning comes to the bladder, or poultice is applied, and you see it distilling water and medicines, so make the entire instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: one from one part and another from the other, as you see; and let its head be placed so that the medicine drops are such that they stop well at the tip without addition, if it can be extracted with moisture, and pour when necessary is done; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw while going; if you draw the moisture into the syringe, and then pour it out strongly while going; if it will enter the moistures within, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle cystern which is used for cysting the bladder: it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d'un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenantment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n'as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d'oile et de moistor et d'aigue, et le lie en l'estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the ways of treating stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said about the difference between a stone in the kidney and other stones, and as to how they should be cut; and concerning the bladder and the penis; and I will now tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder into the subtle liquid; and it opens by itself, and the patient rubs his penis, and turns it often, and then the foundations are worn away; and the cure is lighter for the children until they have reached four years old, and it is much heavier in the elderly, and there is a little pain in those who are between childhood and age; and the treatment is lighter with those who have large stones than with those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient by enemas, in order to draw out all the pus that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he does not trouble himself at any time with cutting into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs and move them to the side so that the stone comes out completely from above the bladder, and does not come out of its own accord; then make him sit with his hands between his knees, and his thighs on either side, so that the bladder is all turned towards down; then feel and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut it off over the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out when you touch all over, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or wash your second middle finger, if the patient is young and complete; and pour it on its base, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your second finger, press at the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your second finger, and pour it away from where you feel cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder to his hand, and he commands that he extends to his right hand the sacs above, and with his left hand he holds the skin that is dislocated behind the sacs in the part where one makes the waist; then he pours the spatumil copping, because this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between what is between the sacs and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left navel; and let it be right on the stone, and your two be together at the fundament, and let the waist go across if it is large from one side, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps press it so that the two who are at the fundament come out without work; and know that there is a part of the stone where it has angles, and margins: this is hard to get out; and if there is a part that is under, resembling a glans, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s'elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu'elle n'eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l'estrainche de vitriole; et s'il i a plus d'une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s'il en i a plusors.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	For if it is very large, then it should be made smaller, and make the wound larger.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Car II things avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t'efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d'encens et d'aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l'estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l'aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc'au tier jor.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because there are two things that happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out again because his body cannot close it; but you should insist on drawing it out, or cutting it into pieces with pliers, until you have finished your work; and when you have done so, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and wrap it up tightly with a wet cloth smeared with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess. Then cut off the patient's neck, but do not loosen the knot until three days have passed. And when you loosen the knot, well apply oil of olive and water, then the oil of basilicon, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Et si l'abces est chaus en la plaie et corroe, et le sang congele en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue l'urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l'urine: boutes donc ton doi en la plaie, et extrait celui sang, car s'il i reste, il corront la vessie, et la pourrit; puis leve la plaie d'aigue et aisin et de sel, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu sei, tant qu'il soit sane: et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sur le leu.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it lies in the urethra, stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; then I have cured this as I have said above, and you should cut many times, so you are excused from cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I forge to forge according to this form, and be III angles pinned in I beam:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take I wire and hang it in the middle of the stone, so that it does not come back into the bladder; then pound the rod lightly in the wire until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand gently from time to time, as long as you can pierce the stone from another side; then soon enough will come urine, then press your hand on what is holding back from the stone that is inside the wire.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken, and escapes with urine, and heals the patient; and if you cannot do this in any way so that it harms him, then I take a wire from the stone and another above it, and stick the wire between the II lines at the top of the stone, and pull it out forcefully, and wash away the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is well.
de la piere des femmes	from the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is necessary to know that stones are produced in women, and if it does not happen at all times, there is great harm, and it is prevented by three things: first, that the woman is a virgin; and secondly, that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to deal with the mirages, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that it is necessary to know that the stones of women are sometimes more perfect than those of men, so that a deeper incision has to be made, and there is great fear; and if necessity dictates it, then you should have a good midwife, and carefully extract it from her, and if you don't get it out, then don't try to get it out with a sharp knife, or else she will bleed to death. And if this does not work, then look for a woman who knows some part of the art, and order her to do what you command in the examination of the stone; and carefully see whether this woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to push her foot down and ask for the stone; and if she gets it out, then she should bind her foot, and recommend her that she put her left hand on her belly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S'elle la trueve, si covient qu'elle la déplace de façon douce et progressive depuis l'entrée de la vessie jusqu'à ce qu'elle atteigne la racine de la cuisse; puis coupe dessus la pierre en la racine de la cuisse contre le milieu du coin, là où il est mouillé, et sentez la pierre dans cette partie; et ne déplacez pas ses deux côtés au-dessus de la pierre ou à l'extérieur, et soyez prudent avec la taille au premier petit; puis bouttez le rat en la taille, si vous sentez la pierre très profondément dans la plaie jusqu'à ce que la pierre puisse sortir clairement, et sachez que de nombreuses manières de pierres existent: c'est à dire, petites et grandes, pointues et rugueuses, longues et rondes, et qui ont des rainures.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If she tears, it is necessary that she moves it little by little from the entry of the bladder until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on top of the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the corner, where it is wet, and feel the stone in this part; and do not move its two sides above the stone or outside, and be careful with the size at first small; then butt the rat in the waist, if you feel the stone very deep in the wound until the stone can come out clearly, and know that there are many ways of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and which have grooves. If you understand its appearances so as to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	Et si la lymphe ne revient pas, mets du vitriole broyé sur le lieu, et tiens-le une heure tant que la lymphatique est enflée; puis reviens à ton oeuvre, tant que la pierre est éloignée, et prends les instruments que je t'ai dit pour l'extraction de la pierre par des hommes pour te secourir dans ton oeuvre; et si la lymphe ne revient pas, c'est de l'artère qui est coupée, mets la poudre sur le lieu et fais-en sortir du sang et de la sueur, et ne recommence pas, laisse la pierre et ne l'extraye pas, sauf si le malade meurt; puis guéris la plaie.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fever has abated, and the blood is poulticed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The water of chamomile is nothing other than the gathering of white or clear syrup, which is found in the ovum of the frog; and it is called "syfac", and never does it belong properly to the skin of the frog's ovum, if one believes that it is another type of ooze; and this skin between the white syfac that we have mentioned; and this does not happen to be poc.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this water is so weak that it comes from the coions, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from a blow on the coions, and this water has many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and that happens more; and these are the signs of this gathering, because if it is what we have said, that is the reons of an abscess, a long shape like an ooze, and does not close the coions, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then is the abscess with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the eggs and the white of the syph, then one feels it well; so that when you see to know the color of the moisture, then try to all the introducer, where its form is before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and covers himself with blankets; then sits on his left side, and orders the minister to sit on his right, and extends the cane to one of the two ribs on either side of the eggs; then takes the leechcup and cups the skin of the eggs among them until he reaches the breast, and makes a clean cut of the skin of the eggs, and cuts it gently according to his power; then he pierces the white skin with water at a wide opening, and draws out all the water, and then puts the leeches on, and closes the white skin upstream; and do not touch the rib of the eggs, but only the white skin; cut the ribs one by one carefully, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return; and if the egg were to jump to your work, you would have to put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the skin; then join the two ribs of the eggs with a stitch, then cure it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended in doubt of the decay of blood; then cut off the coion to all the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled into two parts together, knowing that they are two branches; then cut off the other part as you did with the first equally, and rinse the blood away, and put on the other side wet in oil rosin; and put away another wet in wine and oil, and put over the two coions, and put double sheets over them, and tie it up completely according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two sheets, and fill them with woolen cloth according to this shape, and are joined together by sewing at the throat of the shirt, and one of the heads preys on the foundation up to the back, and the other to the part of the hand; and the other half chief over the two angles, and is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the shirt; and no more is medicated this ramice of cautery in a hot iron, but that you preys the cautery cultellaire fine, and cut off the skin of the coions, and is heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the blood is discovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white syfac once, and scorch it with this thin cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And put the poultice in all ways that you can, until it is dried out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move away from the bloodletting of the vein, and move slowly from the incision of the abscess, and other things, if anything opposite to you, or an abscess or a bloodletting of the vein or something else, then cure what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wait for this remedy because of its horror, then provide a perforation, as I have said, and it is that when you are sure by the meanings that we have said that water comes out, then put the patient on a raised seat; because the abscess is in the part of the thigh to all the large bone, and make the perforation long the way of the bone; and let the opening be wide, so that all the water runs out; then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave it to run out the remaining water, then cure as soon as the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out at the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument that collects water from the drops there, so that it forms as above; and widen the wound slightly, and know that the water returns, and is joined after VI months or less, and when it is joined in the manner described above, then the patient will have his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I know that in this chapter there are many fears, so it seems better to leave it; and I will tell you about the precautions and appearances of the testicles.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many testes come from the cor, and most often from the balls; and this is by much the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be understood: by the acrid and bitter superfluity that spreads to the testes, or from impact; and the color of the testicle depends on the color of the cor; and it does not cause pain, and it is a grief of the testicles; and perhaps there is a sore testicle, painful and fragile, and of strange color, and never comes out of an artery, or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by way of an artery, if you know the position of the testicle, and when you press it with your fingers, and it does not hurt to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to express through the touch of the two hands, and can do well in making the size on this shape, and on other characters; and it is that you cut the cure of the curings, then put the egg in place, and the trail further than the white syfac, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already soaked with these shapes made, then it is necessary that you pull the egg and the coat; and if it is aird to the syfac, or in this which is inside the vessels, it is necessary that you deliver all that held, and the coat roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the shape's birth is at the back, it is necessary that you coat all of it, and remove the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are finished, if you employ the wound with wool wet in oil and wine, then the healer will heal with other healing as long as he is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is one aposteme wrapped in a wrap resembling a bagpipe, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans much when he moves; and the healer of this disease is so afraid as that before; but we will tell you the work of him, according to what the old did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you set the patient on a light seat, then pour the suspensory of the testicles down his throat from both sides, all around the penis, and dry them well; then take a scalpel with a sharp blade at the end of the vessel, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then put an needle there where the thread is double, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and tie it quickly to the other chief; then take them straight, according to the length of the body, and traipse the moist corruptors; then heal the wound as you would do with others who have been wounded, so that no vessel cries because of the loss of a testicle; for by this there will be no harm, and all the vessels come back to life, and they do not want to be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the body
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	About the rupture of the body in section so that it comes from the section or extension on the belly in the part of the angers for which the intestines descend from this section to one of the coions; and this section is from the section or from the extension of her, and come these two ways of mouth causes: or percussion, or jump, or braying, or lifting a grievance made, and similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of syfac, if is that he comes little and little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the apostemes are even until to the end, for so that syfac hurries the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is about the section of syfac that it causes a sudden painful beginning, and the aposteme appears different, leaving the skin cold, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body from the side of syfac.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And let the bowels not separate from the intestine, and is retained within, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of iron to fear, so that it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron to fear, so that it is necessary to avoid them. In this treatment of iron to fear, command the patient that he keep the intestines inside him in the wound, if he can enter; then let him be held firmly on his back between your hands, and lift up the skin; then place the iron above, and cover all the skin with long hair; then pour the oil into the wound, and let it stand; then remove the skin from the flesh, completely, including the hair; then cut the skin of the loins, so that the white flesh appears on all sides; then pour the oil onto the white flesh towards the abdomen; and command the assistant to extend the loins upwards, and to cover what is behind the ligature; and look with your two hands if there is any hard white flesh wrapped in skin, and if you find none, pour oil into the abdomen inside; then take a needle made of thick thread made of XX threads, and pour oil into it; then pour oil into the back part of the flesh which is behind the skin; after the abdomen, then tie the hair together, so that there are four threads; then join them together in the form of a cross, and bind the white flesh, of which we have spoken, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the hair around, and join it in two parts, so that no threads come out, except those which support the skin; and tie these two threads tightly at the top, leaving enough space for the needle to enter; then tie the other two threads according to the circumference that the loins carry; then cut off the excess skin, as we have said above; then bring wet wool, and put it into the wound, and put on the thread that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decomposition of the blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it bleeds on its own; and if it delays in bleeding, then it is raised by hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it bleeds; then cure the wound with another cure until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernial hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancient one said that it is made as if the rope is together with the leg, in such a way that you tie the legs, after cutting on one side lightly on the skin; then cut it off and cure the abscess of whoever has it, as long as the legs bleed; and cure it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No once comes rupture in the bowels, if as we have said, and open their places; and let no one come out of the intestines to the coions, and if any do, it is little, and repairs every hour; and nevertheless, if he stays too long in this point, so believes the wound or syphac, until the intestines come out; and what happens by the extension of the syphac that is to the bowels, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swells their places and opens; and the cure is by cautery, as we have before said; and never is cured with iron in this way: but let the patient lie often on his back between your hands, then seize the place of the rupture bloated according to the quantity of III dos; and then remove the syphac that is under the skin that follows, then take the string and put it on the apparent place of the syphac; and press him perfectly in the abdomen, then cut the two apparent places of the syphac on his head of the string, and cut each one; then remove the head of the string, and do not cover the syphac or extend the oil nor anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramose intestines; then cure him by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you tie the strings, if the wound is healed then tie it until it has healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The stitches are tight, and there is no sign of rupture, and the cauterization is done in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the strings
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the strings becomes softened in some men, because the balls that are within them are softened, and it is necessary to see; and it is good, when one cures him, to cause the string to come out on his back, and to let the soft leather hang on the natural leather; then join the two lips with one stitch, and seer it up, cut the surplus of the soft leather to III stitches or IIII firmly; then tie between the stitches, and cure it as others, until it is healed, and cut the string.
dou chastrement	fire cautery
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For I know that such a treatment is not allowed in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; and there are only two ways: one is that the mare should answer when it is asked, and the cure of it; and the other, because we have often had to treat with fire certain animals to help us, such as sheep and goats and hares and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that treatment is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that treatment which we do with attraction, let the animal sit in hot water, until the joints are softened and while they remain so; then grab them with your hand, as long as they are fixed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the treatment of size: you should grasp the horse, and the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and put it on each hoof as you cut them well; and leave no piece of the sinew and thin sinew which is over the hooves; and this method of treatment is less painful than that which is done by attraction, because by attraction perhaps some part of the joint remains, so that the horse desires luxuriance; then heal the wound as long as it is well.
des hermofrodites	of the hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to two ways like men: one that between the two testicles open also as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in cut the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is in women, and has on the chest between the two nipples also as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of man and woman is that you chop the joints joined together, and cure them as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Is a joined limb on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to look at; and some women also have it as a hand, and it is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you cut off the superfluity of the tetanus to your hand or arm, and cut it lightly; and do not cut too much all at once, that blood does not flow, then apply other remedies until it is healed; and there is another limb that is born in the mouth of the wife, and use it, and by chance it jumps out, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to cut it, as we said before, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	for the errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	for the errant If nature of the woman is not yet perceived, or the pit is small; and is made by birth, or occurs through disease that has come about; or it is by fire, or by a subtle drug or poison, and is perfect in marriage, or in costards, or in soup, or whatsoever; and it hinders conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is through the taste of the breeze.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	And if it should be that you are in doubt, you will see soon enough by looking at your two fingers or by feeling with your hand.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is by a subtle drug, and it is close to the leaves, you will soon see if you hurry and go inside: put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then the two leaves should form, until the subtle drug runs out, and then the stopper should come off; then take wool, and wet it with oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman lie down every day, so that he cannot stand up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the medicine is hard and thick, it is appropriate that you mix it with the scent of hyssop.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the poultice is warm, then soak it in the vinegar and cover it; and add medicines that stop bleeding, such as those mentioned above, dragon's blood, incense, and mixed with a large plied knife, so that the wound cannot heal; and let it rest for a long time, and apply a patch of dry linen; then give other treatments until he is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	When the wound is infected with pus, and it is appropriate to cover it in this way, then it is not necessary to incise it.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For when an abscess forms in the wound, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	are openings of veins that, without surgical intervention, and when these hemorrhoids are old, they become tender; and we have mentioned in the division the appearance of blood, and signs, and I will say here those that bring about healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the hernia, when they are fully developed in the womb, and do not appear in feeling, unless it be by iron cure.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the womb, they can be felt, they are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore you should put the woman in a cold house, then tie the umbilical cord at the claws, and cut it at its roots, then powder on Restraining Blood medicines, such as here and blood of dragon and incense, and similar things; then pour its feet against the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if the blood comes out, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confound it with honey and easily, and make an ointment with it and put it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if it doesn't, then blow into the nose with syringes and do not hurt; then take another, and the juice of plantains or oak-apple with old wine, and blow into the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has stopped oozing, keep the wound clean until it is well; and that which is called "balath" is red, and resembles a sharp stone, if you cover it as I said before; and then clean it until it is well.
des apostemes de la marris	of the joints of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Several kinds of abscesses come to the arm, such as plague and pustule, and scrofula and herpes and progeria and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the abscess that comes with the birthmark, which is not an abscess that burns; and if you know the work of iron, then you will see that the abscesses are sharp at the beginning of their appearance, full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let the patient suffer until the pain is relieved; and then set him down on II seats where he leans his legs apart from the leg; and let his feet be spread wide, and let him tie himself well with a good knot; then let him suck towards his left side, and bring the instrument with which one works the mouth of the birthmark, from which comes the form afterwards; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you test its depth, so that what enters into it no longer comes in completely than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover its depth with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt him; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument above, and darken the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and the hand is made soft by poultice, if it is necessary to cover the head, make a poultice with molasses; and when the bowels are empty, if it is necessary that you put wet poultices in the wound with oil of roses or green dry oil; then place the poultice completely over the wound on the bone, and place clean wet poultices on the bone and on the other hand's knuckles, cooked with herbs, then continue to poultice. After two days of dressing coming before this, until he is healthy; and no time does the bone and wound raise by a hot poultice of water and honey, and then by water or cooked root of lyre and aristology; then bring back to dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed over the bone, keep yourself from cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is better first to examine that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are if you see the woman rush down, and desire to smell air: then the baby's head comes out quickly; then you know that these childrens are according to the natural figure, and the issue is from his head, and the second one with him; and when you see these signs, you should lightly press her stomach, so that the baby comes soon; for when it descends on her head, if the second one comes with him, and is born in a good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it does not come once on its feet, and comes from the chest or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes on her stomach, or often, and is turned around by accident on her neck, and in other bad shapes; it is better to the dance that she be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If a man falls upon his head through natural cause, and the woman gives birth to a child in pain, and his virtue is weak, if they make him sit on a saddle or women hold him; and raise up his nature of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then pour the wine between his two little spatulas which this is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If a man falls upon his head through natural cause, and the woman gives birth to a child in pain, and his virtue is weak, if they make him sit on a saddle or women hold him; and raise up his nature of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then pour the wine between his two little spatulas which this is the shape: and split the second, and cover his fingernail with as much moisture as it runs out forward; and squeeze the woman's belly until the child comes out, and if he does not come out, it is necessary to massage her with muskroot oil made of sesame oil; then make her sit up and shake off the condiment, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: so now the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are able to come out, then it is necessary that you pull them gently a little at a time; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a bench, and lift her feet up; then take off the bench from the ground, and tie the woman so that she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is still alive, then cut off the hands with the knife that has been placed in front, and extract the child, and pull it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the delivery of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to raise it a little; and then turn it little by little until it is even; then pull at the legs and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can't it jump just as high as its knees, then instruct it to bend, and make it swing from the knees; if it jumps, may God help it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not get better as we have said, if the turn is small and small, until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For now it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For now it is lighter. And if he does not get better as we have said, if you take muscle from above, and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and ground all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and away this ointment, then let her sit in water until she is wet all over; and when she is wet, she makes the collar of myrrh, and puts it on, and leaves it for an hour; then lets her sit down, then makes her shake and squeezes her mouth and nose, and lightly presses her belly, because the baby is now coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the birth of the child between his legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this way, so he puts his hands little by little; then he sits down on his neck, and the belly hangs down, and he lies on his back; and he bends his hands little by little, and then he puts them on his belly, and the bones come out little by little until they are naked; and when the child does not jump, if he takes his feet and makes a movement, then he turns his belly upward, and then he catches your hands; and the child comes little by little; and tell the woman that she should pray as long as the child is coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	When the child comes out wide, one hand holds back
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	If the hand cannot be brought back, then the woman should get up and go; if she cannot go, then she should lie down on her back, bend her legs together, then bring the muscle-bending thing that I have told you about; and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a chair, then try to bring the hand back; and let the child come according to its natural shape, and make her sneeze, and tell her to pray as long as the child is coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on its neck, and has spread its hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the midwife hold his hand, then little by little, and gently; and when he is even, as we have said, then he orders her to move a little; and when you have done this, then let her sit down on a chair, and he orders her to lean back; and the woman shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same method at all times
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When he comes in this way at all times, if the delivery is difficult, as long as the moisture is gone; and if the child gets stuck on its mother's face or neck, so that it cannot be pulled out without being held back, then put the child inside, as long as you have done it correctly, and order the woman to lean back occasionally: then let her shake a little.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	That twin children are born many times, and never more than three or four at a time; nor is this an unusual thing, and it seldom happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an unusual thing, and they do not live, if it is known that they be multiple, and they are devised by the apothecary who makes them, which is tied to the mold; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they are born with pain, if the cure is as we have said, and if the apothecary is subtle, and does it quickly and lightly; and do it in such a way that it saves them for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No child is formed in the womb with one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than fourteen; and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and know that the apothecary can do anything, for sometimes similar things happen; so he does according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the wife of a dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to use your hands; if it is necessary that you know if her woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death; if it is necessary that the woman be sore on her back, and her shoulders are inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister dyes her from both sides, where she lies in bed so that she can not be treated for the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with oily oils with musk and almond seeds, then grease his hands with these oils and these musks; then pour them into the woman's mouth lightly, then wants I to let him or she let the oncins that are appropriate to this, and takes care that the child is well dressed that he descend on his head; then puts the oncins in his hair or in his neck or in his mouth or in her palace or shaves her beard or near her ribs, and the descent is on feet, then he pierces it or holds it at the cost of the ribs, and it comes out on its own; and it is necessary that he dyes the oncins with his right hand, and puts the collar between his two hands with his left hand, and pours them out with both hands lightly, and puts the oncins in any of the places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the oncins:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	puis fiche entre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l'estent igalment en movant d'une part et d'autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	Then place another line of text here, or provide me with the next line to translate. I will continue to provide translations and only translations until you provide more context or end the text for translation.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by stretching, you must wrap it in a sheet so that it is all covered; then put the cast on at the joint of the toe or the ankle, and similarly for the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is caught in the birth canal, or there is a sharp point assembled, then you must push the thorny sputum between your two fingers, and bend the sharp point and extract it; or you tear it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or paste that follows this one; and in this way too naturally causes the child's head to swell; and then pull out the bones with tweezers, and the head jumps and is extracted with force, so it splits, as long as the moisture that is in the birth canal runs; and if she cannot come out, then you split it by pieces with the mace that you can; and if it is puffed up in the belly or pressed against the sides, then you pierce it as long as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he is trapped on his feet, then the light tug, and the direction towards the mouth of the mare is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if he is trapped in the belly or loins, then cover that which is trapped with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and free the belly or loins, as much as the moisture there allows; and if another member is dislocated and remains stuck, then pull it with your hand firmly from the mare, and drag it to her mouth; then tie one or two knots, and secure it; and if her mouth is contracted by an abscess that has come to it, then do not make it work, but administer moist and fatty things; and give him poultices, and cut into aqua molita et ad amoxirar.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if he is trapped on his ribs, and you can make it even, then administer what we said about the live child; and if one has no power, then pull it piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, let him bring those who we have said in the apothecary shoes that come to the mare; and if the blood comes out, so let it be restrained in water, and let him bring other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had been bitten by a snake, then another consulted about it, and another said that it was dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the wound broke out, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a poultice of strong attraction, and it issued out a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for the woman's womb had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bone of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to examine the wound, and with my own hands, as long as the woman was in a better condition; and she waited a long time before the doctor arrived, a little bit of a bow came out of her place; and I do not remember this medicine having been used before, except that when the master saw an unusual thing, he knew how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	This is followed by the form of pressure, where we hold the limbs; and turning again to the shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be thinner than the restrictor, and made of ebony or box; and the mouth of the funnel must be wide, and the edges of the branches must meet, a long palm and a half or a little more; and these two supports are inserted into the mouth of the wife so that when the shoulders are turned they open;
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, à sa figure plus délicate et plus légère, est faite d'un bois d'ébène ou de buis, selon l'apparence des tenons; et a deux charnières, comme tu le vois, d'une palisse longue et de deux pouces de large; et quand tu ouvres la marre à tous les outils, si fais s'asseoir la femme sur le lit, les pieds pendant et les jambes ouvertes, puis fixe les deux charnières ensemble dans la marre, et maintiens l'extrémité de l'instrument dosée entre ses cuisses; puis ouvre ta main à tous les outils, comme tu as fait aux tenons uniformément, selon la quantité que tu ouvres la bouche de la marre, jusqu'à ce que le baquet fasse ce qu'elle doit.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	Cette instrument est tout entièrement montées, et sont multiples pour leurs figures; et quand tu les regardes armées, tant plus rapidement l'ouvres-tu, et tant plus haut pour leur quantité.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I do not despair of the instrument, you must have equipped it, because their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is prevented from being born, you must instruct the patient to hold her hair back, and then make it twitch in the condition, and keep your hands away from her mouth and nose; and if she cries because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not happen, I can do it myself, and make a cup or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the patient, as calamus, Rue, Anis, Chamomile, Cassialigne, and Centaire; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or poured into water on the fire; then put one side or cover in the pot, and the other in the patient's mouth, and let it boil as long as the vapors come out of the patient's mouth; then make him twitch, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If he salutes the second hospital.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If it remains after this cure and is not healed, instruct the patient to soak his left hand in olive oil or musk of aloes and then let it dry out naturally, and then stretch it; and when she has found it, if she grasps it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the joints do not crack, but she moves it slightly from side to side, and then stretches it, then it will come off.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation of herbs; and if it is only that which we have said, you must be careful not to follow when stretching; but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the wound, you bind him to the lap of the woman, then you clisterize with ointment tetrafarmacon; then she will sneeze and be well, but nevertheless, when she sneezes, if there comes a bad odor from the stomach and head, and bleaches the disease.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If so, then there are some smoke infusions that are appropriate for this: no one of the ancient ones has tried an infusion of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument that you should use to smoke the woman at the retention of the flowers and the second one is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a snake in appearance, and you place the thin end in nature, and the large heads above the fire; and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan until it is exhausted, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but a skilled surgeon should pierce it at his right time, and he should not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and bind the lancing so that it does not touch; then put another wet cloth in wine and oil, and cure with ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, then put a stick in the way, and let it be hand-free, and be ostled when he goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no return of the sudden wound from a wound or abscess; if it is covered suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said above, from the stick of plunk.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodulation, and more painful than those that come from the fundament go away, or in the space between the two parts, whether one or more; and when this nodulation is old, if it opens, and also moist awouse white or subtle bow, and these fistulas never persist; they are known by what is done there, or excretion or wind. And sometimes a spring comes up
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they prick between the bladder and the half of the penis; and reach up to the join of the cunt, and up to the root of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus know if the fistula reaches to the root, and does not reach: and it is that you stick your little finger or root, and stick a fine needle of silver or iron in the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, if you stick a piece of string or hair from a horse as far as your finger can feel it; and if you do not feel it, then does not come out any twisting expulsion or wind or sight, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; otherwise hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches up to the bladder or up to the conduit of the urine, if the urine sauts, and cannot be calmed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just up to the join of the loins, then let him try coming up to his place; if there is no twisting and no invention of pain around the hips, then let him know that he has already come back in his place, and there is no medicine or hasty remedy by feeling, and these persistent abscesses do not have a cure except for work, and the vain thoughts of the foolish people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	If it is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of health by surgery, as I have experienced, and that is that the patient lies on his back between your hands on his back; then he raises his legs up to his hips, and his hips are bent towards his abdomen; then pour a bucket of rain, or a plunger if there is twisting, until you know where the attempt comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, then you should insert your index finger, and you will feel that the tentacle has been pricked; and if it is uncovered or you feel between your thumb and the skin or hair, then know that it is persistent; otherwise, it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	All treatments for this disease have proved useless so far, but some have worked a little; and the aid that has been given is this: take a very small firebrand according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above; and dip it into the fire until it is red-hot, and then do this twice or three times, until you are sure that these spades have been burned, which look like an owl's feather; and then wash the area with moistened oil, until those spades fall off, and then bind them up.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is already well, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not, otherwise it cannot be well; and if he tries to push between the two, and does not pierce up to the root which is at the fundament, and puts a thick covering of cloth or of medicine between his two legs, and you see the fistula at that place where the covering touches the ground; then take hold of the edge of the fistula, and press it together tightly before the covering, and then apply the cauterization afterwards, until it comes to the head of the fistula; and will be cured of the fistula, and will go away; then I have heard that those cloth covers made like a goose feather, and do not remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the bleeding does not stop, and you press between yourself and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or with medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization joins two things together: namely, the burning of these cloth covers, and the drying out of blood and the drawing out of moisture; then heal the wet tents with dry salt or with coarsely ground herbs, until it is hot, and burn those cloth covers in the hot place; then cure the wound by scraping off the hardened herbs that are wrapped hard around the bone, and they are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored, if it is well and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes only to the foundation, and is distant from the heart, this one, being torn, will make you weep.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	And if you feel the tent, and between it is the fabric or the silk or the leather where it is about to pierce, there are only two ways of hope, by one of these three methods: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it up to the foundation, or you can tear it off with your nails; and do not go too far in the cure, so that you cover the part that holds the foundation, and let the excretion happen voluntarily; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove this covering and clean it up after it has been cut away from the foundation, or with an instrument fixed; then burn off this rotten flesh that is in the wound, as long as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part distant from the foundation: this will be a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times of ulcers according to this way: and it is when you pierce the tent in the ulcer, and she is or coster dou fundament d'elez le cuir desus, if take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bottle up I thread in 2, and bottle the tent to all the thread in the ulcer as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is percie in the margin of the fundament inside, then extract the thread of that pierced, so that you bottle up your two at the foundation; and draw the head of the thread, and join together the two shoulders, and extract one from another, and leave it a day or two; and do not restrain it again, until the thread has closed those holes that are between them, and have chafed; then cure the wound as long as it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If it does not burst, if you pierce it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too completely blocked up.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make a cover for it if it is completely blocked up, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spud with thorns from which one makes a fistula is very acute and sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and on the other hand it should not be covered at all, or else it should not be covered, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they may be inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and small or large, and there is a little or a lot of blood, and they have the color of the flesh; and the cure for those that are inside the fundament is this: you must instruct the patient to strain himself until the foundations come out, and let him spit them out; if he does not spit them out because of his moisture, then hold them with your fingernail, and cut off their roots; and if they do not stay cut off because of their moisture, then take them with a bandage, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them off, and powder them with hot powders that are for cauterizing; or you cauterize them as it is said in the treatment of cautery, for other cures until they are well; and if the foundations cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a hot clister to wash what is inside the foundation, so that it can come out freely; when the patient is straining, and the roots have come out of the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is done by holding them with your fingernail or with pliers, and cutting them off, then curing them as we have said, until they are well, and avoiding incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you prepare the stitch according to this method: take a twisting thread, and put it in a needle, then pass the thread over the top and pierce the needle from the other side, and bring back the two ends of the thread through the needle, and if they are wide apart; twist the thread into a form, then tie it, remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave it to draw out the excess blood; then put on the foundation a wet towel soaked in oil or balm, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave him until he starts to bleed, and when he stops bleeding, treat with ointment and other treatment until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	at the end of the stitch or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying out at the end of the intestine due to its nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you cut off the skin from a spatumile or your nail, which does not leave it moist; then heal it until it is hard as it should be; and if it cannot be healed, then restart the rasuring more strongly than before, until it heals out, and is scarred; then heal it until it is healthy.
dou fremit	Do you fain?
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Is it painful? The formice is a small appearance of heat before the body, and it passes entirely; and there is no pain in it, and one can also feel it as though one were dead, and it spreads throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the healer should take a hair from an owl's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place that hair on the pain, until the purple circle surrounds the entire area; then bring your hand back to the end of the hair until you feel all around the pain, and put it in place, and scrape the pain from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so make this of a dog's or a horse's head according to this form, and be subtle and draw across:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, so make this of a dog's or a horse's head according to this form, and be subtle and draw across: ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser And cauterize the fire, so as it is in front or chapiter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cloister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No clister of silver or archaut, or melted bronze or brass is made; and no instrument is made small or large, according to the uses to which it is put.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	So as to be brought for the treatment of children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cloister is small and large above [the head], or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say there is a gap where the belly is tied together, so that you see it, and the chiseled sides are pierced inside; and one of the two has a hole, and the other; and the belly where someone puts medicines from a bladder or parchment, and pierce all around the small holes, and put between each hole an inch of space, then pour into these holes a strong wire thread twisted in X or in twine wrapped around, and tie the belly together as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if he binds the instrument in front of a strong thread, then bless; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or olive oil or some similar thing is applied to the clister; then pour it lightly; then the ministers spread their hands together, until they are completely wet, then remove the clister, and place the patient's legs against the wall, and let the medicine come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster him with plasters when he is sick from a decay of the abdomen, and the medicine quickly comes out, then remind him until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or an abscess, then the plaster is also as thin as for a child; and this is the form of the thin plaster where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds are made, and of how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by hitting a stone, and a size of an axe or a mace or a spear or a fust or a lance or a sledgehammer, or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, so as a wound that strikes on the neck, or on the head, or on the side, or on the stomach, or on the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, for the reminder will come in his plaster.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes where the head is, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from movement of stone or similar things, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is great, and you doubt about the temperature: if you do this quickly healing from the head itself if it comes little blood from the wound, and let the healing be opposite to the wounded part; and refuse the patient's repletion of wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	I say that if it does not heal, if its meat is wasting, and it does not drink wine, nor does it eat cheese; and put on the wound, if it is hot, wet with oil and dry up a little; or, if it is cold, wet with wine that makes it stiff; and if there is no heat in it, if it is fresh all over, and is not moved by the wind, powder, which I will say a little later; and if it has been moved, put on some onions, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as of a sword's blade and similar, and the lips cannot be joined by tenons, if they are joined by sewing, as I will say to the wounds of the belly, from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And if the wound is exposed to the bone and it can only hold for one punch, then wrap it with leather tightly; instruct the patient to eat large meat, as well as baked bread and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find dry rot on the leather and it has not reached the bone, then cut it off completely and burn it, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which, without bandaging, cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put this powder which hardens so that fire has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalts three parts, and powder it finely, and apply the wound, and bind it together, until it has healed well and joined together all its blood; and then bind it firmly, and leave it untied if it swells; for we do not use medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we use any of the chalts alone, when we have not incense nor dragon' s blood, but that fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fire has moved the wound, at most it is still wet, but put on any of these medicines: or eggs of eggs yolks cooked in wine or honey, until it has dried out; and then heal with other remedies as long as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head next.
de la plaie dou col	from the neck wound,
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the neck, if there is no other device than to let it heal, and not put anything restricting, because it harms the neck and makes it retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuation is with the skull, which is the highest member; but be the medicine sweet, if like hot water in cold water, and mix it with oil of roses, and wash it too in cold water, and other pebbles of mining according to this way, and wet them with oil.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then the cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and the bowels are full of blood, then the piercing or more deeply; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, so that it becomes dark, and the wound is washed, and cauterized as above; and if the spitting in the throat is cut, or the voice, and the conduct is guarded, so that meat goes well, if the cure is made on the chin of the throat, and not touching the throat but sets it according to its natural form; and then binds it forward, and leaves it for some days, then cures with ointments that are useless as long as it is healthy; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then search for it; and if there are pieces of bone, if you can reach them all, and those you cannot reach, leave them until the wound putrefies and is cured and the issue goes out; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle the powder that I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound, and there is a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look out for windiness in the patient: since then the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep and is fresh throughout its length, then do not put on powder at all, nor bind it so that it does not come apart, but let it rest against the wound, and wrap it up, but if you have no ointment, put raw wool in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient lie down on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then he will not get spasms or a bad shake from the body's reaction; and when you see the bones in position, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the boils and other cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, then suture that there is a fistula; so the cure as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, deep or on the back, then heal with this; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, use powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and there are pieces, then cut the wound, and the sharp ones if they are caught; and if they are not caught, then let the wound pus, so ease the extractions; and for other wounds to other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement du ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the abdomen is great and small, and there are many wounds; therefore the intestine often comes out, or the intestines come out, for which the incision is made; and the stitch is less difficult, and there is no more pain in a small wound than in a large one, so that we place them back again from hot to hot; for this reason the intestines swell sometimes when they feel cold, so we place them back again, and because they are worse for a small wound, whereas we hold them back at their own level, so that they are not worse. And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to three ways: the common stitches come out in the stitch of the abdomen, and the stitch of other wounds comes out in other places; and yet they are more proper with the stitch of the abdomen, and I will tell you each one and I will explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has come out, and there is no need to hurry, this should be done in one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat it in one of the two ways: moisten a sponge or a thin cloth entirely with lukewarm water, or cook it in warm squinant and cumin and spice, and draw out the intestines as much as they swell; and never stop doing this, and rest, that you may cool down.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestines with water or warm it and boil herbs, because this keeps the entrance closed to a small amount; and if it cannot enter, if you make a small cut in the wound with the instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to rest that we do not cut unless there is great necessity; and this is the tool for splitting: if you cut inside the core and take it away, and see how it looks like this.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines are loose, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, for this is worth doing, because otherwise it will not heal.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large and in the part of the loins of the belly, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part of the loins of the belly, then raise the head and the chest higher than the parts of the loins, and so the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, and so you arrange it that what I said about large and small wounds applies.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you should arrange it so that the patient lies on his side, and then place your hands between them to minister to the rupture with your fingers; and gather the lips together. This is the common way of suturing, and it is that you press a needle or more, according to the quantity of the largeness of the wound, and then leave two inches from the edge of the wound on top, and stick a needle through both ends of the skin, as far as you can get it into that part, and gather the two sides of the skin together; then draw a double thread around the needle from both sides, and gather the two edges of the wound together, and then leave an inch or so, and stick in another needle; then lead the second thread around the first needle, as you did with the first, until all the wound is closed; and let the needles be medium size, fine and coarse, for the fine needles will go through the whole skin, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be of medium size; and do not push the needles too far away from the skin and the cuir, lest they break the skin and open the wound before it is sutured; and then tie off the ends of the thread, so that the patient does not scratch himself in his sleep, and I cover the needle ends with cloth or blankets to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound has healed. This way of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for if you sewed with a single stitch, you should gather the two sides of the skin and the two edges of the wound together with one needle or thread, and sew them together as you would cut cloth; and then leave an inch or so between each stitch, the length of a smaller finger; this stitch is good for men, and I sewed up a wound that had once been cut by a knife, which was naverted [ruptured] from one side of the abdomen to the other, and it was torn open by the intestines, which were as wide as two fingers, and the wound was in the middle of the abdomen;
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought the intestine back; then it had been for 22 hours outside, and it was sewed up after 15 days, and I healed it, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the mirth had told me that he was dying, and it was a miracle; and I did not heal it with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no ointment to be found, nor any medicines; and I put on cotton wool twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two ways of stitching: take the needle and dip it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced through the middle, so that the thread of the right side matches up with the thread on the other side, then tie it off; this is how one should stitch, just as the fur-dresser does when he stitches fur, and you should leave the hook on one side, and bring it back to the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galen did properly, is if it is so that there is no thread, which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the heads to the other head in this manner: take a needle or thread from the next head, and make it go through the bottom, leaving the two heads together; then turn the needle, and make it go through from the outside part up to that inside, across the two heads; then make it go through the one and the other from the outside part up to that inside, in two other heads that are on the other side; and this is the muddled way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And Galen did so say, and no one testified, that you should sew the belly to two needles, or there is a thread in each; and you must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew rope; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, this sewing is more painful than any other belly sewing.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l'ait muee, si remet arer l'intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l'ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se tu n'as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu'ele comance a giter bowe, coton veel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k'il soit sanez.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	If the wound is fresh and the arrow has gone through it, remove the Arrow, and cut off the hair around it; then apply powder mixed with water and oil to the wound, and bind it with string and poultice; and if the wound begins to hurt or ooze, often dip a light cloth in wine, and wash it over the wound; and if it is an arrow that has entered deeply, the wound will ooze blood and pus; and know that when the large intestine is injured, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal stuff called "jejunum" can't heal when it's still attached, and that's because of the way veins are planted, and because of the whole body's subtlety, and its resemblance to babies.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	If the lump jumps out of the wound, put it back in like the intestin, while it's still fresh; and if it's old and turned brown, you need to find the spot that's black, since there are veins and arteries; then cut what's between the two bones, and hang them from the side of the wound all the way to the back so that the extraction can happen when the lump jumps out, and the wound will close.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture in the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestin is ripped and the wound is small, you can restore it in some places, since I've seen that some good ones were navered or pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became wrapped up and turned into a fistula, and that's where the excretion and wind came out; I applied treatment according to what I could find, and I didn't stop being subtle until it healed, and I sewed up the leaks.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et when I saw it sewn up, I doubted that the patient had done him harm in his belly; and there was no harm, but tarried in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and none of the experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he must be tied up in some manner: take fibres from big testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the fibres have opened the mouth, put it on II lips, so that she pulls her mouth up; and then li takes his head, and that is so that he cannot release it, and then puts another fibre after in that manner before, until the wound is all taken; and let the wound go.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if it burns in the intestine, and does no harm to the patient, and can be tied up with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal in some manner: take the end of that thread that is slightly severed, then tie the end of that thread to the end of a fine twisted linen thread, then sew the thread into the intestine, and cut it off at the tear; and this method of sewing with fibres is no more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the small intestinal grooves, there is no cure except subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	for the fistula so that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	I know that all wounds and abscesses, once they have healed, are called 'fistula' in general terms, and most especially when they have furrowed the skin and become a bowstring.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	I know that all wounds and abscesses, once they have healed, are called 'fistula' in general terms, and most especially when they have furrowed the skin and become like a bowstring; and there is never any clear popping sound, nor is there ever any pain, it is as if there were no wound. Nor has it been cured, and I have not spoken of the division of wounds, that all wounds which are not healed are due to one of the VIII causes: namely, the smallness of the vein or artery; or its evil nature; or because there is something hard inside, under the lips, so that it does not let a hole form; or too much bowels; or the part is rotten and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because it is like pestilence in the region; or because digestion is late and health is slow to arrive and escapes by nature; or there are veins or bones: I have already described all these causes, signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula, which is achieved by handiwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sinus, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes that it enters into the proper limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of great difficulty, and there is only work and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the limb's main place, and similar places, then it must be cured, and you have begun to cure it, and you have recognized it, then take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, seek it; and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a thin tent of lead, for the lead bends around the twists; and if the fistula has broken hands, and you cannot cure it well with tents, then cauterize it with fire, for fire corrupts it so that it no longer hurts; and then cure it thoroughly, as far as you can, then put medicine in a tent that is moistened with water, and bottle it up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrupts the excess that is reserved at the bottom; and then put oignons that are rotten between the clean ones, as much as it is cured; and if it is not cured by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cauterize it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If in the neck there is a pain or injury to the main members as we have said; and if the jaw is dislocated, and there is corruption and darkening, so long as the corruption is all bone, then treat with medicine until it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and it returns as before, knowing that you have not yet reached the root: if you discover and seek until you are at the bottom, and take away all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is healthy in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this does not work, know that the corruption is too complete that you cannot come to it; if there is no other defect but to allow nature to act; and if there is one small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with the right tool for this, and if there are many bones, then break them all, and do not leave any; and if moisture makes you wrong, and there is no mistake or fear, take off and wet and heat, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you do not remove them in an hour, place over the wound something that causes putrefaction, and let it be as long as the pus is between the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, wait so much for corruption until all the bone is blackened, then patch up the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption and it has come to the root of the bone, if it is worth and cover everything up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take examples and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	Here is the first sentence of the text: "Et si tu ne les pois oster a une houre," si mets sur la plaie chose enjanrant pourriture, et laisse tant que li luis soit pourris entre les os, et adonc si avront plus legerement les os; et si c'est un gros os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis retoure la plaie; et s'il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient juscy a mole de l'os; si le convient soier et coper tout juscy a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu'il soit soudez.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent over one of these openings, and then searched all the openings and found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I rushed then, and covered one of the openings as much as I could discover part of the bone, and found that it was corroded and pierced, and the corruption extended all the way inside the bone; I knew what appeared to me to be the bone's corruption, and took care that there was no other corruption than that which I discovered; and then I began to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, and could not mend it; and then I began again, and discovered the bone just as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and knew it, and then I took out the bone, and leaned over it so that I could mend the joint; but I couldn't because I covered it with one palm of the bone, and I put it back together with medicines; and it healed and was mended firmly, and I didn't need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the sick person, who couldn't bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car for the evacuation of blood happened often, but he was healed entirely, and gave birth to the bone a hard shell, and was of good temper and had no harm or contrary from all to all, nor to air nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	If the bone is broken in any place of the trunk, then it shall be in this way: take a thong, and stretch it to the head of the bone that is open, and command no one that he should extend it upwards; and put another thong of larger size than the first thong, and fasten it to the shell that is over the bone, and untie the thong, so that you pull the broken shell off the bone, and uncover the shell on the place where you see and feel the corruption, and fasten again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole charnel; then place a hot brand on it, and then thread the corruption from one part to the other, and let the thread hang down from the length of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the joint that is corrupted, and thread the bone or what is in its place; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other injury but that of the coper; and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or at the knuckle of the foot, then this is very bad, but it is necessary that you inquire about this corruption, how it opens up; and purify it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not make it opposite; and know that the saw and the threads for capping these bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and their size and subtility and greatness and smallness and hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to arrange each tool according to its form, and know that the work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the signs of the ways of diseases; so consider the tool that you have need of according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	When the shoulder is dislocated by pressure or from falling, and when you have applied medicine to this corrosion with cures of medicines, and it does not benefit, then cover that member to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from this death, or from the evil, which is greater, of the defect of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, as though they were burned by fire, and this corrosion spreads from one member to another, and penetrates all over the body; if you hurry to cover it, and if it is by the stinging of certain poisonous animals, such as sea scorpions and weasels and similar things, then cover it quickly, for it does not give space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cover it at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue; and do this whenever the corrosion appears or progresses: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it comes or progresses down, then cover all the way down; and if it comes up in the leg, then cover at the joint of the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to make the sick person die; and the manner of covering or weaving the member is that you bind it above and below with one minister's thread and another minister's thread, and you loosen the band which is between the two threads at a wide spatumile, as much as the bone is uncovered; then cover or weave, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the weave does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the sick person another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the pain comes when you work, then cauterize the place well, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it is well; and I will tell you what happened to the man at home in a moment: he got a blackness that looked like fire had burned him, and that corrosion came first on his foot, so that it hurt all his foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, then he covered his foot with copper, and he healed; and long after that the corrosion returned to the palm of his hand, and came to me, and I put things that reflect after cleansing the skin, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope of reflexing the material; and I also doubted that if I would cut off his hand, he would not die, for the man's virtue was weak; and he despaired all, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with copper, and he healed; and I have only told you because there is another way that they might do this, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No times comes abscess in the middle of a charred meat, and lasts so long that it makes a big bunch of bowels; then it rips and perforates, and jumps the bowels, and remains the viscera shut, just as our servants do; and the leather which is above it is also very thin like the drapes we unravel, and does not corrode until it reaches the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it has grown so long that it reaches the bone in full, then it is called "fistula"; and the leather which is above it, you should cut all this leather, and most especially when it is thin like our drapes; and does not harm for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you think that the leather is getting redder, and the corruption has not yet reached its full extent, and the leather is charred like a brand, then apply this: take medicine from ancient Egypt which is made in this way: take equal parts of oil, and resin, and chalk, and put them in a vase on the fire until the medicine becomes red, and also thickens; and then take some of it according to your need, and make an ointment with honey and water, and apply it to the breast, and strain the medicine out; leave it for two hours, then squeeze it out; do this many times until the breast is completely white, and the pus comes out; and never use water from ashes when this medicine is not present, but take ashes from a vine stalk, and pour water on them, then boil it, and make an ointment with it, until you know that the breast has become completely white; and if the patient cannot bear the medicine, or the Egyptian medicine, or the water of ashes, then make an ointment with honey and wine which is slightly sweetened, so that the property of honey to whiten and wash is present, and the wine makes it bitter; and when you have done this, and know that the breast has become completely white, if the hole from which the milk comes out is small, and the catheter cannot enter, then make it a little wider with an iron tool, and put it in a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it becomes wider; and if the wound is too wide, leave it open to the air where the catheter can enter, and if the hole from which the milk comes out is at the top, then cut it higher or lower than that place.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in perfect health, they should not be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the navel as you see fit, prepare it in such a way that the bowels run down to the lowest part that they are, for when the bowels are in perfect health, they should not be disturbed and if you cannot cover the navel as you see fit, prepare it in such a way: that the bowels run lightly downward, leaving nothing of the bowel; and take medicines that solidify it over the navel, and place them on I linene drape that covers all of the navel; then cover at the lower part of the navel with a thin piece of linen according to the quantity of the opening, and place it over the navel to support the bowel, and do not remove the large drape until after many days once; and those who are on the navel opening should often remove it to remove the bowel, and know what runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digested or indigestive; and take care if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has spread in such a way that you see the nature rise over the navel opening, know that the breasts have begun to move, and approach them with care; and then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, if you change another drape, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become swollen and uncomfortable after many days, know that her breasts are not yet developed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons remain in the body for a long time, do not despair of health, because health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some who delay the healing of wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if breast swelling persists for many days, know that the breasts have not yet developed; and if the breasts are late to mature, and seem to be drawing back, then prepare medicine by mixing a mixture of vinegar and oil, and dry it in the sun; then grind it and use it; or, make honey with it as follows: take mirr, aloe and incense, and grind them together, and add wine; then use it as a paste, and apply it to the breast; and never give it as an infusion, for if you do, you will cause great harm, and this is because corruption begins to spread in the bones, or in the limbs, and this is what causes healing to be delayed, and not to be healed with this medicine, so know that complete corruption has set in, and has caused a pressure in the bone, or in the limb; if the cure of the fistula is delayed, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toenail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A bunion is an aposteme that arises from the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps in another two; and when it has become deformed, and we do not take care, then it becomes a bunion that runs and corrodes and breaks down the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrupts all; and there is a corrosion to the bone, so much that there is a painful and pungent pain, and the two bones are wide apart, and the color is pale.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, then you must cut off all the surplus that is reserved of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy too; and if the nail presses the flesh and begins to prick it, and bleeds, then you must cut off the nail that pricks the flesh, and cut it high, and trim the tip of the nail carefully and lightly, and put on the remaining part of the nail burning and corrosive remedies to destroy it all; and then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corrosion est dans l'os, alors il doit être taillé et traité avec force, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois la déformation, alors tu dois le guérir autant qu'il est possible de le faire sain ; et s'il est blessé et enflé, et sent une grande douleur, alors il convient que tu le guérisses d'abord ; puis taie l'ongle avec un scie obtenir en coupant à travers au-dessus, et veille à ce que la coupe n'aille pas jusqu'à la chair qui est au-dessus de l'ongle, car le malade ressentirait une douleur excessive ; et s'il arrive, alors mets quelque chose sur lui qui apaise.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	la douleur du sourdoyer de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Il faut soutenir ce qui naît dans les mains de certains hommes par accident est tout charnu, et par accident il a un os, et aucune fois il a une onglet, et aucun d'eux naissent à la racine de la jointure, ou la naissance est dans certains de nous des deux.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil who is born between two limbs do not move, and cil who is born at the joint of two limbs, by chance they move; the size of the one who is charnus is so light in a certain way: cut it in its root with a wide chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil who is born at the root of the joint must be carefully treated: if you have any doubt, take care.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or must be cut at the derrien nout, it is necessary that you first chop the fat roundly up to the bone, then chop the bone with a suitable thread and then cure it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by birth, or by jointing a wound, or by fire burning, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you doubt that you have properly jointed the jointure, so that it repairs itself according to its natural forms; then place between two towels or drapelets soaked in oil and rosin, so that it does not joint; or place between two pieces of fine cloth, until the joints are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.
des vils	If the wound comes between the two palms, then wipe it as it should be done.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The vis are thickly coated with a melancholy waste that comes from the core members of the body; and there is more in the legs of those who walk on their feet and work and carry loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must not perform any cleansing of the wound, and then heal it from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure with iron is according to two ways: one is that it is wiped, and the black blood is drawn out; and the other way is that you let the wound ooze all its blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size of the incision is according to this manner: arise the first the leg of hot water very much, until the gross blood is thinned, then extract the leg of the ill person from above the knee down to the shin; and wipe the wound in one, two or three places, with a wide incision, then drain and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to another, as much as the virtue of the ill person can bear; and then bandage it, and order him to blacken his meat by rubbing with black ink; and restart the evacuation and healing when the wounds are clean, and wash the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the sight is twisted and contorted and wrapped together, and it is not straightened, as we have said, it is necessary that you should break it wrongly, but not cover it; and turn it over as we have described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the shape of the iron where one covers the sight if it is curved, and does not cut it, so that it covers the vein; and it is a heavy curve, for if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and thus is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in the ground where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this leads to the skin's decay that comes from within the body, spiraling like a snake, digging between skin and bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then its places change, and begins to issue forth, as well as a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then its places change, and begins to issue forth, as well as a root of a plant. When the head is opened, so that you wrap a piece of cloth around one third and a half up to two thirds., and close it, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time there is some left, if you wrap the cloth around again, and close it; and if it is too long, then cut off a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it back over its root, until all of it has come out; for if you cover it back on, then it enters into the char, and causes an abscess or putrefaction wherever it is; so that this thing must be done little by little until it comes to the top, and there remains nothing of it; and it never happens that this disease comes when treated with five long hands, or ten, but I have had one come up to ten long hands, and when you cover it, if you press it down or lift it up, and pierce it all the way through, so that everything is taken out; and the matter inside is emptied, and medicines are applied to the root of putrefaction every day, then cure it as well as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never cut at this vein, and least of all when it is opened at the joint of the foot or the foot itself, for there is great danger, and therefore it is better to avoid it; but if you must do so, then do as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "buff disease" because it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and cart, and goes up and down all over the body, breaking through the skin wherever it goes, and causes putrefaction of some humors, as worms and snails and insects and larvae; and one may doubt its malice, for when it goes through the body, and comes to the head, and enters the oil, it may turn back, and destroy the oil; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you view it to heal and extract, if you can only do so when he goes: then it is necessary that you place the joint above and tight with a strong knot, then cope on and draw it hard, and let it fall perfectly into the cart, and you don't find out, then cauterize him with fire as soon as he dies; and the greatest damage he does is that he runs oil, just like we said; and if you see him come where the head is near the oil, then pull off his sack tightly, then cope on and draw it hard. It is necessary to use the patient's washing of corsages with soluble medicines for bad smells from corruption, and sear with meats that are rotting.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our language "vakirir", and it is a pain which comes to some members, and because of which one member moves to another; and I have seen this which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and saw a little swelling in the veins of the arms; and immediately it went up as high as a worm in the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, so that it felt like a piece of silver when it passed from one place to another; the pain left that place, and entered into the shoulder, and then after a short while corrupted throughout the whole body, until she came to the other arm. Then she told me that she was twisting herself around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled at how this woman moved from one member to another, for I had never seen such a disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had never seen anyone with such a disease move from one member to another before; I thought that perhaps this was why the woman's body was so rigid and her veins were exposed, and also because of the constant twitching she seemed to be doing; and I didn't rule out the fact that those who are luxurious, and have moist bodies and veiny arms that are covered up, might experience such a thing.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if he opens like we have said, let him lie on his back and rest comfortably in that position; then cauterize the site; and if you do not see blood at the wound, treat with pills that stop the bleeding, with serapin pills, and similar remedies.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	have different shapes, some with large tips, others with small, some with feathers, some welded, and some with two angles, some with tongues, and some with pieces; and some pierce in any member differently: or in a principal member they pierce, as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she dies, then you shall know the sign: if you wish to extract this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, so lead it, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrow enters and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull comes out, it is when the scotomie and stiffness and turning and redness in the eyes and inflammation and redness of the tongue and spasm and disorder of understanding and vomiting of food; and perhaps it does not come out from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and when this sign appears to you, then you should take care of the cure, and lead the arrow if it is not fully extracted.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuyr, sont qu'elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s'elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a seizure when it starts is that there is no foam from the wound, and the throat swells, and the color of the patient changes, and he gasps and makes a loud noise.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the seizure starts in the back, then it rips the small ribs; and it makes a lot of noise and pain and gasps; and all the members move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the seizure starts in the stomach, then sometimes there is something coming out of the wound that is not meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow enters the belly, and it does not come out through the intestine's rut, there is no hope for healing, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow enters the bladder, and urine jumps out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the aid and the spine and the force and the crotch and the legs, and the limb that looks like it are safe according to many provisions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not move, so I will tell you what happened to me, unless you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow was in the chest or the lung at the root of the neck: I tried it, and I pulled it from another side away from the ear fat, and I got well without sense.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And try to trap an arrow that the target shoots in the grease of oil paper; and the arrow was caught, and there could be reached only the tip against the wind, and the arrow was great of a turquoise arc, altogether I hear legibly without ears; the game was sane, and no ill accidents came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And try to trap an arrow that a Christian shoots; and the arrow was Arabic to ears: I knew the beards, and delayed as much as I trapped it, and the Christians were sane.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And try to trap an arrow that it was chewed or stomach, and I thought he died; and then after XXX days, so did not move its disposition; I cut on the arrow, and made it fast, and trapped it hard, and there were no ill accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish for a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is closed above it; delay the arrow within him, and do not change its natural disposition, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I see another man, who has an arrow in his face, and the wound is closed above it; and thus he delays suffering great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a prince's arrow that had entered his neck, and it was a little lower on the right side; and the arrow was all bloodied up. I was called to heal him after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I asked it to take all the time necessary, and I did not feel it; but he felt tingling and pain on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought that it was the point of an arrow I put on him the plaster of the stomach to prevent his intestines from swelling, and I saw the bowels of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for three days, and quickly resolved the wound, and held the patient for a long time until he felt the arrow inside him; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for three days, until it was open, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was growing at its place; then I used that same medicine to make a small opening in the wound, until the head of the arrow became visible; and after IIII months passed, and then the wound opened so much that I had to use tweezers from both sides, and I could not pull it out; so I did not cease from trying and devising ways of tools, until I took it with tweezers well made, according to what its shape would be at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it, and brought back the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of the nose cannot be healed; but when I healed it, the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	And you said the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, because the livres cannot take all; but the master surgeons compare well with a few small things, and with those that are present and failing, trueve nine work, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign objects which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are not of the members or they are stuck except according to two ways: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and which one jumps out, it is a arrow entering into its flesh, and does not jump out at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her leave the pole in place, and make it light; and if she is stuck in the bone, and can't get out, let her stay like that for some days, and every day take off a little of it; and then she will jump, and if she doesn't jump, then pierce all the way through very thinly, until the inside pole is larger, and then take it off.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the neck bone and goes to one of the shoulders of the skull, and some of the accidents that I have said above to the patient: do not pull it out, but let it be even for a few days, because if the arrow comes out just to the windpipe, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the neck bone and does not go any further, and stays there for a few days without any bad accidents, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck like this inside and cannot come out, then administer tartrate of sulfur, as I have told you; then treat the joint while it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the neck so that it cannot be seen, and you want to take a good look at it; and if you feel it, then handle it with suitable instruments; and if you are unable to pull out the arrow because of the wound, and because of the thickness of the arrowhead, and there are no bones or nerves or veins behind it, then break or bend the arrow as much as possible while pulling it out; and carefully make sure that you do not break the arrow.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do this once, then let him stay until he is well; then remove it, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the pain from the extraction makes him uncomfortable, then apply what we have said in our chapter about the remedy in his ointment; and be careful when incising the nerve and opening the vein, and do not pull out the arrow quickly or slowly or firmly or gently; and make the patient conform to the form he was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it does not affect anything, or if the skin is swollen in that place so that it can be seen or felt at all: cut then off to the size of the nail, and then remove it: do not wait now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly until it enters into the bone, and enlarge the hole in the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then let it rest for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out; and if there is an arrow in it, then draw it out with a needle; and if the arrow is stuck, then administer relief with leeching, if you administer leeching with a knife, so that the point of the arrow enters into the cut of the knife; and then draw it out, and if the arrow has been cut, then draw the needle into the point entering the cut of the instrument; and then draw it out, and if the arrow has been cut, then draw the needle into the point entering the cut of the instrument; and then draw it out, and if the arrow has been cut,
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, then it is necessary that you cut all the skin around the place where the poison is; if you can do so, then heal the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces you in the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, then you can cover it with a cloth, if it covers; and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound, if it is necessary; and cure it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to remove arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and thus should be used as follows:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do it: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the bit used is also like the beak of an owl, to catch at the tip of the arrow, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the forceps for piercing and extracting are as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the neck common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	XXXI veins from which one is cured are XVI, that is to say: II bats which are behind the ears, which are called "dous herbech"; and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and II veins which are in II arms of II hairs, which are called "aspires"; and the vein which is under the forehead; and the vein which is at the head of the child; and the II gizzards which are at the throat; and the II veins which are above the lips, and these are called "augeherich"; and the veins which are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one is commonly cured are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the chest, and it is called by lay people "vein of the head"; and its companion is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and it is called by lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic, if it is on the right side of the chest, is called by the lay people "vein of the belly", and is above the scapula, and this is the one from which one is cured, which opens clearly on the palm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voynes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voynes desoz celles.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The saving ring is the vein that runs between the index and middle fingers, and if it is injured; and in the leg and where the foot are three veins: one is removed from the bend of the pocket on the left side, and the second, which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins removed from those. The saving ring, which is between the ears, helps with the old catarrh and migraine; and the quality of the salve, as I have told you, is to return the chief of the sick person, and rub it where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tie up the vein with a knot until it is cut through by the blood, and then open it wide and clean it out thoroughly, and remove the blood; then tighten it up, so that it heals well. I have already spoken about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation of the text line by line: 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The doctor of the front vein is as valuable as the physician of the head in the cure of the ancient diseases of the face, and migraines, and sleeplessness; and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called 'fosseur', whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and firm it with your hand or something else, and let out blood according to the quantity that you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not good that the flame be too hot; and the surgery across the way, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame breaks when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The surgery of the two veins that are in two layers helps with bloodletting, scrofula, sleeplessness, oil-eating, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their surgery is that the patient twists his neck without a ligature, just as we have described above; then make the incision, and some little part of it on one side with a small flame, a little large, for there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is subtle flames, by chance so breaks; then make run away blood, as much as you need, and then put on a cloth, and well fasten it.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the blood from the vein is running so fast; then make it run away as much as you need, and then put on a cloth, and well fasten it. The blood of the birth so runs in sudden pain, and in sudden sickness of the face, as migraine and fever that comes into the face, and even when it is old; and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strangles his throat, then strain his birth to your left hand, and take the subtle flame long, and put it on the lip in the space that is between the II nostrils, for the vein does not open well again, and now it will start to run; and do not go too far on perfection, and make the blood run away according to your need, then lie it a night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the health of the lips, the veins above aid in swallowing, and in the corruption of the gums, and in the splits of the lips, and in the birth and entrapment.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and tighten his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by this that they are black, and because they are small veins: so take the largest of each, and do the same to the two veins above and below, because it is a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	And the health of the tongue comes after the health of the head, and it is to the constriction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the doctor is that the patient should gnaw between your hands before the sun, and the tongue, and look at the two sides, a black vein each: so heal both, and do not stop too much in perfectness, for the veins are constricted.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly treated are done so in two ways: either by poking deeply with a sharp, broad tool, or by pricking gently with a small needle; and they are called "anesthesized." They are large and fine according to the size and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is deep and broad, and it is called "deep," and it is broad as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins that appear thick with prominent blood vessels and contain large amounts of thick, murky blood; and this is the shape of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and it is to be used for treating fine veins where there is subtle, yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment for a vein in the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is appropriate for the healer to treat it thoroughly and to cauterize the artery that is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he hits the earth, and the flow of blood comes, if it is necessary to stop it, as I said; and it must not be struck with fire, but cut off like a sheep's ear.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary to extrude and change it; or you do not want any rain from it, or you heal at the place of it by opening a vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and it is struck with fire anesil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the place of the wound clearly, if it is necessary to extrude and touch the base until you recognize the hair; then mark the base with a cut, and then return the arm, and strike the vein with fire anesil; and be careful not to hurt yourself in the artery when you see the place of the wound, because it is from the artery: avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it coming out on top as urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from an artery. So hurry then, and put your finger on it for a long time, and then lift your finger off of it so that it may stop flowing; let your arm be still, and don't move the patient; and be afraid, and don't move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood doesn't stop flowing and comes out, and the medicine isn't there, then cut the artery because the head of the shoulder is dislocated; stop the flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig root, and break it in two, and lay one half on well until the other; if it stops flowing, it is good; if not, then the powder that stops the blood; and the stopping of the blood must not be done in many different ways for the small size of the wound, and the power of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The patient should place the vein in the center with assistance from the middle part of the shoulder, and from the back of the neck, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic bone, as we have said; and let the surgeon wrap his hands around the neck to warm the nerve that comes out of the back, and if he pushes too much, the nerve will break, and it will swell and the bones will be wounded, and may not heal; this nerve is very thin many times, and if it does not open in any person because of its thinness, you should cut it with an anesthetized instrument; and avoid hurting the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The surgeon should hold the cephalic bone as he twists it, and fix it with a sharp instrument; and you should cut at the flame of olive oil or the flame of wine, for this is the safest vein of all, because there is no back nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, if it should seem to be easier to try for the lighter life first and defer the heavier one until later, and start again; and in any case, if this should happen that the winds increase for some men, so that they have to delay the first time, but it does not cause pain.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about health care is that healthcare should only be pursued to maintain health and prevent future diseases; and it should be done in one of the three seasons: head, fast, and base; and one should engage in healthcare at the beginning of prayer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of satiety appears; and one should engage in healthcare on the first day or third day after two hours or three days a week.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The patient who is cured of disease does not have a determined heat, but when the time comes for it or for food, in all hours and at all times; and it is not appropriate for the doctor to cure children until they are 12 or 13 years old, nor women who have been pregnant for only four months until they reach seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Do not cure the old people who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	If you are going to cure anyone, in whatever way, it is appropriate to have them drink a light clistere if they have diarrhea, or if they have held back pee, so that the intestines do not draw out the harmful waste that hurts the main members; and it is not appropriate to cure someone who is too swollen from meat, or who is bloated, as much as possible, or yawners; and if there is a passion of colic, vomiting, cramping of the belly, and frequent urination due to having many sexual partners, and staying up late, and eating, drinking, and taking medicines, then it is appropriate to cure them, but slowly; then take a bath or a dip, unless something helps them, to subtilize their heat, and make them well from the vein at the back of the knee on the third day, as we have said; and guard yourself from that work, and from eating late, and lust, and similar things; and be strict and disciplined, and let the healer who heals you be higher than the one who is healing; and rub your arms twice or three times, then pull the cord with a little force because if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot be fixed; and then rub the healer with your left hand on the vein where you are going to cure, a little at a time, until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the healer with the flame of a small drop of old oil, then put your thumb of your left hand on that vein where you are going to cure, so that the vein does not hurt and feel it; then rub your right arm with your left hand a little at a time until the veins swell and can be felt.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like strings for the sailor, and if they are such that they are prone to windiness, so when one puts them on the flame, then removes the flame, and cannot open the vein, then they are of this type; and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary that the sailor be warned of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then begin again a little more of that same medicine or on hospital, if the leeches are not swelled.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the leeches are swollen and the patient seems to improve, let him rest for a day or two, and do not tie his arm: perhaps he will get abscesses; do not put them on the flame, but begin the treatment again if it pleases you; and if the wound is small, or there is little blood flowing subtly and you doubt whether it will flow as much as you see, then set the fire directly on the wound; and do a little hospital work, so that the leeches are swollen. For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see a vein burst, do not warn the patient, and put a little oil on it, for it smooths the path of the blood, and the oil is soft in this place; and thus administer the oil to each vein that you heal the veins with, so as to stop the flow of blood; and the same does triaicle and bowels of ewe when put on top of the area; but if it is too thick, it will split so carefully.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If you see a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put a moist sponge on top, and tie it tightly for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the exit of the blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days there is no harm, but if you see it, put any of aloe or mirr on the juice of calamus, mint, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there was an abscess and appearance at the base of the thigh: so put your hand on it, and if you find the soft part under pressure from the hand, then this appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting anything on this that we have said, because perhaps in cutting through the artery; but dry it with poultice to harden the place, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it out until it is red; and if you see the lump large, let it out until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for those who are flat and foreign, and need to extract blood, let them make a larger wound and wide flames; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and heal them little by little, and cut them across, not cutting them forward; and this way of healing is saved from the decay of blood and the swelling of nerves, and it is better than long healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose course is towards sickness, it is necessary to give damp bread in grape juice; if it is heated, if it suffers from three or four times of wind and gas, and if it has a cold complexion, if it is served before the sick dry bread in syrup of muscat, or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and dates, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it has a fever at the beginning of illness, after the exit of the wind of the sick, it is necessary that it smells brew of wine and subtle odorless syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it vomits up one arm and sickens another at times, when it is weakened by great sickness, that it be healed little by little according to the quantity of its continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits up his arms after the first hour, and he has a strong heart, if he is sick for seven hours after the first hour, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who vomits up elsewhere, if he must vomit the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has blood coming up from within the body which heats him and brings fever; if so much comes out, and the opening is enlarged to the point that it chokes him, then you should treat all conditions of vomiting, and put your hand on his pulse when he vomits, lest death come to him in a fit, and this happens often, as long as he neglects to treat the vomiting; and do not break the shoulder when you see it dislocated, and bring up the blood the second time, and close the opening, that you press hard upon it; nor if it is broken, let him stretch his arm out widely, for that would be wrong, but leave it until he vomits the second time; or you may point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood which comes up is frozen at the opening of the vein, and put a piece of string dipped in water on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, leave it alone and do not restrain it, as long as the abscess is quiet.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain blood a second time, let it be done in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is tied at the base of the vein from which blood flows, so that it does not flow further.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of tying this vein is that the patient holds his hand in hot water until it turns red; then let it rest gently so that the vein appears clearly, then tie it now across, neither wide nor long; and if the cut is wide, tie it close to the joint of the hand, and do not remove it again, unless it comes loose, then put the hand back in hot water and let the blood run in the water as long as you have enough; and if it has come loose, do not re-tie the hand in hot water, for we tie it more in haste than in rest; and the tying of this vein is more safe from all other veins than if there were no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	The treatment for a liver disease with the right hand is as follows: stretch out the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein disappears if you can see it; and then twist the hand around, and cut off all of it at once, unless it hurts anything; and don't cut too much at once, because the nerves are all exposed and bare, and then put the hand back into hot water, so that it does not get frozen in the wound, and cannot be taken out.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The doctor will treat the patient's disease with fire cauterization on his left hand, and you should do the same for the right hand as I have instructed you.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The treatment for the patient's disease of the shoulder should be applied to all other diseases that affect the body, such as those affecting the arm, and also to pain in the back, legs, and feet, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	For the quality of the treatment for the patient's shoulder disease, it is that the patient should dip his affected part in hot water, and rub it on the vein until it heals, and then apply it to the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and then many rains go up the leg; heal the rain, or more rain, or at the ankle, that it may move.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat the patient's foot, be careful of the nails that grow out, and also treat it by walking as if climbing stairs, and let the flames go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out on its own, put the foot into water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if he needs to be resected for the first time, begin again for the second time above a little on top because the joint is salty; do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and thus make the surgery of the other leg even.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The joint of the sciatic vein is at the ankle and its resection is worth the pain in the hip when it comes to bloodletting.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this resection is that the patient goes into or bath, and extracts from the ankle IIII with twisting, because otherwise it does not open; and if it opens, do so in all ways that you can, and going over; and it is worth more to cut than let it be, for the joint is out, and it is very reponsive to hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not [set it] straight, so that there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little finger, and guard against the nerves; and make so much blood flow that you see, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; now he is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	vessels for sucking up
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made from horns, or leather, or glass; and ventilation is done in two ways: either by hurting and drawing blood, or without hurting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventilation which is without hurting is in XIIII parts of the body, so that one is all in the head; and others are under the neck; and II others on the two sides of the neck; and the windpipe is behind the throat; and the windpipes are at the two arms; and the windpipes of the two legs; and the windpipes of the two ankles; and ventilation does not deal with blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore it does not matter if they are all opened or some of them are left closed, as is done with a sucking cup; and it should be adjusted only to those who have an excess of food and drink, so that all their bodies are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Et s'il est nécessaire à cause de maladie ou d'habitude, nous devons les faire ventouser toutes les heures pendant le mois, ou à la fin, et au milieu de chaque temps ; car il y a de tels qui, lorsqu'ils ont besoin de ventouser, sont très lourds ; et ceux qui ont une forte haleine et des rougeurs sur leur visage, leur chef, leur cou et des ténèbres dans les yeux ; et ceux qui ont une goutte de sang dans leur bouche et la langue enflée, et qui boivent du sang ; et s'il y a de tels qui rêvent, et voient par manque de nourriture et de boisson et de mort et de choses semblables.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and especially when it is mid-month, we order them to ventouse after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The medicament of the fever with aid to the greiness of the head… which comes to the hairs, and cannot come but after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in the place of the medicament of the cephalical, and cannot come but to those who are of a cold disposition and use it, or who have a chattering, for this does them much harm; and therefore it cannot come but to the old in using, nor to those who have cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become confused, and for this the suction cup must be placed a little further downstream due to the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the neck is in the place of the healing of the head and the basilica, and therefore it causes stretching of the chest, and a cut in the throat, and vomiting; and therefore it should be released little by little, for if it holds too tight, it brings confusion or stomach trouble or anything else.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The winds at the back of the chest as the pain in the head, and it blinding and migraine, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of the health of the temple; and it is necessary that you instruct the doctor that he presses his hand with a putty, that he does not grip the artery, and does not cause the flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The winds at the back of the mouth as disease in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is in the place of health of the lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The winds at the shoulders as disease that comes from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The winds at the arms as much as three veins in the arms, because it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the doctor that he does not cut too deeply, for their bones are bare, and they know how to cut nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse that is on the back so suits to emoroid of the fundament, and to maladies desoz, and it convents that the ventouse be big, and be of air, that she has need of well traire; and per adventure, if she were subtilz, she would break; and she makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg ventouses so open, for they draw blood from all the body, and suit to ancient pains of the hips, and of the feet, and of the bladder, and put back the flowers; and are in place of the two knees, and the two ankles, but weaken the body greatly after long use, and bring death in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way of putting the ventouse is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and place it carefully, and move evenly, and do not cease to do this as long as you see the red and inflamed place, and appear the pain of blood; then set fire, and remove the ventouses, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are such who have great fever, and thin pores: so it convents to wound once only, and to make deep wounds, and a hole by depths; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if he is thin outside, he must strike twice: once to make the blood thinner,
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if he is very fat outside, he must strike the third time; and when we want to squeeze out blood little by little, we only need to press once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to squeeze blood out, let us start again often; and if he is fat outside, he must be struck completely, and the end is such that the pulse stops suddenly, and he covers himself with an oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in spring, use violet oil or sweet almond oil or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in summer, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is swollen and cold, take oil of amber, or of balm, or of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if it is sore to the touch and large pores, there is no need to put oil on it, but it should be washed after the wind-bath with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberries, or water of cucumbers, or water of porcelain, or otherwise.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if it is wet with moisture, if it comes up with this, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And if they have swollen swollen parts, they are raised with old wine, or with water of oak, or with a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and they should not be treated with the vacuum before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and they should not sleep after the wind-bath, and it must be warmed when it is necessary to treat it by wind-bath, and when it has been wind-bathed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And guard those who are healing from being coleric, and their heat is too sharp and inflamed; it is convenient that he drink cold things, such as pomes, endives, lettuce, and similar foods; and let him drink a little water, and eat little meat; and when he has wind, he should drink more than he eats; and it is convenient to give some men three times a day bitter or musk before or after ventilation, in order to strengthen the principal members; and make his stomach subtle, but it is not convenient that those who are cold should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are used to cause pain are those placed on the liver, and the mouse, and podagre, and on the belly and the bowels and the rain and the hainche; because this member does not feel pain when it is cut, and we only do this to draw blood from one member to another, as we put suction cups on the mammary glands when the child is not yet born; to remove the viscous substance that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and the bowels to weaken the member; and it removes pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if it is removed by its attracting virtue, or deserts the stone from its place; and so does it when it is placed on the liver and the mouse when there is wind retention, and these suction cups are emptied together to suck only a little; and they are never emptied all at once, and they are never plain with fresh water, as in the pleurisy, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water or water in which herbs have been boiled suitable for that.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus: It should be two hands wide and half a palm deep, and have an opening at the center just big enough for a pin or needle, as if to hold a thread, and made of brass or iron so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle a cross bar of brass or iron, so that a grip can be taken with it; and there should be large and small ones according to the disease and age of those who take them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And it should be placed thus on the limb: Take the thread or thread grip, and put it behind the bar at the middle of the suction cup, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and your two hands are behind the opening that we have said, so that when you put it on, if vapor comes out, and then remove the suction cup; and take the thread as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the ventouse now which is amined in disease of pleurisy, to all water, has no verges nor perforations, and is amined only when it is plain of water, and is placed on the limb so much only; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	In the suction cups now which are used in disease of pleurisy, to all water, have no vertices nor perforations, and are used only when they are plain of water, and are placed on the limb so much only; and this is the form: Suction cups are not used except in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their smallness, as lips and gums, and similar things; and in a char's leather, if a dog or deer, and others like them; and the quality of using them is that when you find suction cups which are in clear sweet water without danger, then take them; and put them into sweet water, as long as they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let them go down from the vein and from the suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and put the suction cups on; and when they will be plain, and will be filled, if it is possible to place a suction cup there, then put it, for that is worth more afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the joint from there, and then of water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the joint is too late after the heart of the blood vessels, so moisten a linen drape in cold water, and put it on, until the blood vessels are dried up; and if the blood vessel multiplies, then put on crushed vitriole, or garlic, and similar things, until they are dried up; or you put half peeled peas on the joint, and leave them until they heat to the joint, now they will dry up; and if you need more, take other blood vessels.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the blood vessels do not want to take it, then rub the joint with fresh blood, or you stick an needle into it until the blood comes out, and then put them on, and sometimes when they feel the blood, they heat up; and when you see that they are peeing, then powder a little aloe and seer broached, or ash, so they will pee now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The various chapter are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are restorative for a fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the wise men poured this chapter on this book, which you will never find in any of the old books or letters; and for this reason the science has been lost in our land, for I have never found any good one; and I know nothing, except by the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it clearly at the end, and have shown distinctly the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore fitting that we begin our book with the chapters of speech and the principles where understanding is placed, and delay it on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a break, dislocation, twisting, or strain in anyone, it is fitting that you quickly seek to save the patient from pain on both sides, unless there is no stopping it; indeed, if it is weak of frame, or old, or its tendons are not very strong; and if he has a very small girth, or too much exercise; and does not drink cold drinks, nor eat any greasy foods, and does not fill himself with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the temperature of the head, or the spread of matter in the limb; then bring the patient back to his normal way of life.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats which make one fat, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and eggs, and pies, and cakes of cheese, and meat, and fish fresh, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with good nutrition, the break will heal faster and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the old and decrepit broken bones cannot heal or harden the members together as they should by nature due to the age of the bone, nor do those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children; but it is necessary to fix them with large joints that hardens and joins the member together, until it hardens as it was before; and do not at all spare its work, and for this it is necessary to nourish it with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is another than the break of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the knee, and another that comes with grinding, as when one cuts the hair with a razor.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that makes a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each manner there is its own tool in the restoration, according to what comes to one's mind in its place; and this is the break of the bone because it twists, and is wide open far from the joint, and is pressed by the hand; and when there is no twisting, or when it does not touch the joint, and the patient feels no great pain unless there is a fracture, but he may have twisting, or a cut, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move it by hand, but instead put on the medicine that comes next, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that it makes in the arvol, and there are the II parts separated, it is now necessary to put them together equally, so that the apostemes of a chaus come, and if the apostemes are choulz, if you leave for a day, as long as the apostemes are calmed; then he puts it equal to the mus that you can easily and carefully put on him, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of the one who has pieces; then constrain it, as it is necessary here after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if the extension of the II parts is hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small limb, or at II strings, or at a string and at your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are fixed, you remove by all means the additions in their places for the mus that you can, and keep that by your work there does not come to the patient injury or pain; and well join the II heads of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And test well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if the dressing is clean, and do not strain it too much, do not press it as those who bring it with their ovraige apophtheme hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in order, teach the patient that he not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, turning or otherwise; and guard well that the member be so stable that it feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, it is not yet in order, and it is necessary to put it in a position that there be no pain; and guard well that it is put properly, so that there be no tortuosity when it is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken limb is different in small size and large size and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, as foot and hand and other members: it is convenient to wrap in linen cloth soft and fine; and those that are large, such as thigh and leg: it is convenient to wrap with a broad and hard cord, for the wide cords embrace all the limb fully, and constrain it evenly on all sides, so that there is no gap; then tighten the ligature lightly, III times or IV according to the limb, and constrict the hand a little on all the cord, then go up over the break and constrict less, so that the break is slightly removed from the break; and soften the cord slightly and slightly, until you press a great deal of blood out of the place of the break, then take another cord, and tie again tightly over the broken part; then go back to the part of the break, and constrain it lightly, not too hard or too lightly, as we said in the first line above; then put between the ligatures of linen or cloth, so that they are all even, then lie all over with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or an abscess, put something soothing over it, and let it rest for a few days; then tie it up with half a wide cloth wrapped in strips, or with a pole used to make cleats, or with palm branches, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And the stake that is placed over the break should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and it should also be as far away from the member as possible, small or large; then tie it up on the stakes as you did with the first one, and tie a string of the same material, like the first one; the string should be tighter, not too loose or too tight, and made of linen; for if the string is thick, like those used by foolish craftsmen who make their braces from linen threads, it is a great mistake, because the bracer cannot be equal if it is too narrow, and it only comes from one side every two inches.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pregnant by the chaps of stars after extraction in her own limbs, then put them in sheaths of linen or another rag so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the seam is broken, I will tell the cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not fit to extract stars from all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it does not fit to put stars on them before five days or seven, or more according to the urgency of the abscess, hot sometimes; and know the ancient method of plastering to restore fracture, dislocation and torsion: and that you take flour so it stands on the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring fracture in many dispositions, and most especially in women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to apply plaster: for fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take the resin of the mastic tree, and the resin of the myrrh tree, and the resin of the ash tree, and safetida, and arabic gum, and mugwort; 500 pounds of each. Take myrrh and aloe, 400 pounds of each. Take alchelli, 800 pounds. And then grind them into powder and mix them with honey from bees; the patient's body heat will act as a catalyst for this plaster, because it is a good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to apply plaster for twists: take mugwort and bee balm, 500 pounds of each; myrrh and aloe, 400 pounds of each; alchelli, 800 pounds. Grind them well and mix with honey or bee's brood; administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to set joints and bones out of place, to relieve the pain as soon as possible, and the sawing of the bone, and breaking it: take another new one, and softens it with boiling water and oil, and put on his place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Emplasters of this kind do not restore, but are good for relieving a hot abscess, and properly healing the bones.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to set broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make an emplacement.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to set the bone in place and to calm down the abscess: take the roots of the marsh-marigold, and cut them into small pieces, and boil them in water and oil.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the roots of marsh-mallows, chamomile, violets, vesce flour, each one a part; and grind them together, and mix with wine, and apply to the members which are warm, and apply with water or brine, and thus use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to burn the wound more strongly than the first, when the healing of the member begins.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mullein, and seeds of flax, buckthorn, melilot, and sweet grass, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; then grind them up, and make a poultice with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine, depending on the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book he says that we should not put on the broken member anything other than a poultice made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it must neither be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that we should put on the broken member dry things a little warm, such as mirr and allspice and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of plastering that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and goat hair, or feathers from a bird's tail, viscera, and rope, cut it into pieces of equal length, grind them, and make a plaster out of it and lay it on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then take off the plaster one day later, and check that the patient feels no pain, or that his bone has not moved from its place; if pain comes to the place, or itchiness, or relaxation, or swelling, hurry up and take off the plaster now, and wrap it in a light cloth, and dip it in sea water, and lift it up until the itchiness stops, and the pain is relieved; then let it rest for an hour, and then put a dry cloth on it, wet with spring water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage, until you are sure that the abscess is warm; and then continue to gently remove the plaster, a little at a time, and do not pull it off as hard as before; and carefully keep doing this until it is completely cured.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is swollen and painful and red, I have taken it all away, and you must apply ointment and bandage, if it recurs, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not occur to the member at all of what we have said, if it does not become loose until after III days or IV or V or VII; and never leave it for XX days, according to what is seen, as long as the break-up comes, and approaches the joint to the chair; then restrain it more than before, and make it fatter with meat, as I said before; and if you see that it dries up more than necessary, then wet it immediately with hot water, every time you loosen it, and let it be for each third day, and pour a little water there; by this work therefore cut off the pain to the member, and break down carefully what is wrong, that restore the member wrongly: it is painful, and if it comes with worry and fear, and I do not see any other thing than making it loose and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways to break
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many ways to break [an bone], and various shapes, and the causes are distinct; because there is a fracture that is made from the impact of an axe, and the collarbone completely breaks the bone, just as it does with the haunch or buttock; and for this reason this way of breaking [an bone] is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or an axe breaks the bone from above without piercing, and it is called this way of breaking  [an bone] "absolute"; and is the wound of these two great fractures or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact from within, or a crack, or the collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that approaches the membrane that is behind the bone, or that is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that has penetrated the bone is as fine as a hair, and for this reason it is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by a stone or by a fall or by another similar thing, and a piece of bone goes into the hole; and the head of the bone is so shaped as the blacksmith shapes his hot iron when he puts it on the bellows; then it enters between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if the bone at the top has become wet and soft, so that it is like the head of a child; and if all these types of fractures are broken into small pieces like the stars; and I will talk about them in their own place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by pulling them up and investigating them and by the rotten cart that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The "capillaire" appearance is caused when, when you discover the bone, and you rub it up, so that it opens the fracture black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for a fracture, take care of accidents due to disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, extension, palmation, feverish ague, and hairs standing on end, and others similar in many conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you hope for healing, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the break occurs first, and it is winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is summer, you must remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone does not rot, and the accident we have mentioned occurs.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone occurs only as far as the tissue that covers the skull, you must split it open in this way: and this is how you should press on the chief of the patient's pain, uncover it all over the bone as well as you can, and on the shape of the wound more slowly than you can, and let decorrement of blood come to uncover the bone, or abscesses, assist him who is appropriate, and it is that you fill the space with damp fabrics in oil; and let rest the wound as long as the abscesses are calmed, then begin to remove the bone, and this is done according to II ways: one way is that you chop off narrowly in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I pour another such amount as the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several different lengths, some short and others long, and they are pointed and made of iron; and in doing so lightly, that you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce it from within, so that you send taillemens through all sides of the test, but not perfectly so as to pierce beyond the bone's edge; and there are several, so that each comes at the end of the bone's edge, so that you have taillemens for all sides; and this is the shape of the three ways of making the hole:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	And the quality for piercing inside the bone is that you put the tarele on top of the bone, and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then place the tarele somewhere else a little further along, and do so all around, then make the incisions at a slight angle as we have said, so lightly as we have mentioned, so that when you take the bone in your hand, or hold it to any of the instruments that you have there like pliers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the cerebral bone nor the sinew.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if it is perceived that you must hold back the aprite which is held back by the bone from all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be softer and more delicate than the other incisor; and if it does not hold back any small bones or scales, if it holds the bone lightly against the instrument; then heal the wound with the tenes and oignons we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way to treat it is that which Galen says, which is safer; and press it very hard, for that is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break is open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you shall place the tip of this lens-shaped incisor thereon, from whence it takes its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part of the bone in two sides so that the cuts are towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet above, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the ligament that is torn; if it rubs against the bone, then gently break the bone because the bone can do great harm, and there is no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone does not break all the way through the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover them with a sharp razor, where you must have different amounts, to adjust in each case according to its need, depending on the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have sharp razors that are too large, then switch to smaller ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and delicate cuts, you should bring it according to its shape; and this is not something that has been answered by those who have put their studies in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is covered, then you should bring a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled up in II or III, moisten it with wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you don't injure the wound, then apply a second one above, and don't strip it off except to wash the wound completely; and let it rest for a day or two until the abscesses are calmed, thenstrip it off, and apply medicines as roots, flour of times, powder of incense, and aromatix (an unidentified substance), and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and apply medicine constantly without stinginess; and guard against leaving the wound dirty, or letting bowels gather above the cloth, for when bows gather over the linen of the skullcap, if they run and get corroded, they bring great harm to the patient; because when you put something venomous on a wound, it stings from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	If it is a bad accident that comes upon the patient, so as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if black bile comes upon the patient due only to the medicine that has been put on him, whose virtue it is, then you must squeeze a part of honey and III parts of rose oil and III drapels of glue and apply it to his skin; then he should be treated in the manner in which he needs to be cured until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You know that neither of the two bones above it ever breaks, or if one does so by itself, for these are two bones; and this bone is cartilaginous and never breaks unless it is bent or twisted and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then you must push your little finger or pertuse dou neis and make an equal break in it with your index finger and at the knuckle opposite, until the bone regains its natural form; and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if he breaks in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to his place, if you think that you should put it equal to the top of a thin ray.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if he breaks in two parts, then do the other way, and hurry to restore the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess is calm, then bandage the neck with linen strips at the top of the break. If the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bandage another from the other side, if he breaks; and may the strips be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that one should not dry the bandages; let each one be moistened every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they are moistened in a mixture of alum and powder of marble; then leave the bandage, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And no longer bottle up or nease peens of goose in the tent, and if there is wind to wrap it, and hold the rupture, and blow on the sick person; or do so as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses come to a birth while you are operating, so that you put cotton wool soaked in oil or in eye drops, or in a small cup of salves.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses do not come to birth, so apply a paste from flour and sisham, and powder of incense, mixed with olive oil or with egg yolk, then put it on light poultices, and do not bind the loins; and if the break is small, and he is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments according to this, then cut it off, and heal things that have been burned, and suddenly, as you apply pastes and oils appropriate to this; and if there is no wound within the loins, then heal the tent, and put plasters of cloth, until he is well.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is small, it is not broken into two pieces, but rather a little bent inside, unless the fracture is very slight.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is in the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger from the right hand, and push the break inside slightly, and make it even with the left hand as well.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is in two places, you should extend it on both sides until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth due to the break, then tie them together with a gold, silver, or silk thread; then place the broken jaw on a double cloth, and place a long, wide piece of leather over it that matches the shape of the jaw, and fasten it to the mandible with a knot, and command the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, if you leave it for a third day, and then put back what has changed; and apply plasters, of flour from the mill with much yolk or flour from seed, after you have taken out the cerote; and put on another light plaster, and if the plasters stick, and the disposition of the sick person does not change, leave it as long as it is well; many times are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses come out, if you administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take a piece of the bone out; if subtle tools are suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, if you widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have broken all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is large, put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent infection, until it is healed.
de la forcele	forcibly
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	and then forces it several times in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is as follows: or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work as follows if the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder joint that is forced; and the others extend the neck towards the affected area; then make the fracture even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair splitting.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to do more, so tie the shoulder of the patient with a round staff of cloth or linen and make it large according to your need; and put out and lift up the force, and hold the staff in your hand, so that you put the break even as is appropriate.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the staff at the end, so that it comes out completely, then let the patient lie down on his back, and tie the shoulder to one side, and hold the member up with a strap, so that the bone of the staff is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then put the break on both sides, and if you find debris, so split it; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, so that you take off this instrument, to save the life of the sick person:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and appears like a spoon, and is not hair, and is also as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has II chaps, if you see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, so as the rupture of the wound that you made when you broke the bones; and when you are sure of the aposteme being hot, if the wound is hot, and the rupture is small, or you doubt about the aposteme being hot, if employ the wound with drapels and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot apostemes come, if wet a drape in oil and salt and wine, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The strenging of the bone, when it is sore plaied and sore tailed, is that you put upon the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and of the ash of ufe, and put thereon light stapes, and put a sper of wood thereabout, if thou hast need thereof; then take a very strong band of a palm wide, then put thereon a drape double, and the plaster; then take an evil thin stel of three fingers broad and long, and wrap it about that band, so that the chief of the band be hanging down; and put the stel upon the fracture, and turn the band about the neck, and fasten the stel tightly to the bone; and the ramaine of each part, and when thou seest clearly that the stel holds not the fracture back from the bone, then thou hast need to take another band, and when thou seest that it holds the fracture in place, and that thou canst feel it move no more about the bone, so that thou keepest the band thereon, and so that thou dost not loose the stel from the bone by any accident; then let the sore man lie upon his back, and put thereon a little orler of wood about the assele, to lift up the ajutoire; if thus the fracture is strengthened by the aliging of the shoulder, where thou dost bind the arm to the neck, and if no bad accident comes thereto, then begin again the plastering, if thou seest that thou hast need thereof, and fasten it and leave it so, till it be restored; and it is restored in most cases in XXVIII days, and in less time at some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	For if the shoulder dislocates and moves from its place, and does not return by itself, but returns with some effort, and then returns to its place, and is positioned correctly in all ways that you can; then put powder from the mill with much flour, and make light dustings, and put it on a double drape; then put on a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, and tighten the board around the shoulder, so that the board does not move from its place, and keep an eye on it every day; and whenever it amoles, tighten it again, and make the board equal if it has moved away from its place, and lay the patient down on their side; and the shoulder is reset in 20 or 25 days. And when that number is complete, then let it go, and be sure, for this is not bone that moves easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is stretched out ahead, and there is no pain in it, if done so, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the shoulder blade to calm down an abscess, warm.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The piece is never broken in the middle, but it happens sometimes; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the joint, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no relief, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and he feels all well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and you put a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and gently make it even in all ways as you can, until the shape of the bone is like this; then wrap it in a cloth, and stick it on the broken bone, so that it doesn't move; and bring the strapping around the back, and tighten it tightly, and loosen it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if it comes to loose, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and loose it, and remove the plaster, and treat it in a way like this; then put back the plaster, and tighten it until it is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the rib fracture only occurs in large size after the spine, and towards the top, and they do not ache much unless they are bent.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the healing is such that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on plaster, and a splint of a stick if you need one.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is downward-facing, then the patient feels great pain and vomiting, as though he were crying; because the bone does not close the opening. And it causes great loss of strength, and it was a long time before he recovered.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of these serve to inflate the abdomen so that the break goes away on its own:
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, except for heated abscesses; if it has not come, it will come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it be healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And no one will say that we put vacuums on the joint to suck out a form, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the vacuum does not attract the excesses to the joint due to weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And no one will say that we cover the joint with another moist oil; and we put tents between the ribs to make the place even, then let it be cured with the cure for plague, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot endure it when the bone rubs against the tent, there is doubt in the patient; then you must split the bone at the break of the rib, and place a tool to hold it back; and then you should cut the two ends of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, then put on drapes soaked in oil and place them on the wound; and cure while the infection is in the root of the abscess, and give soothing poultices to the coast where it is, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the throat
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Any time comes to the breaking of the bone of the throat, and it does not stop; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see if he will be healed or not, then take warning if your hands are swollen and inflamed and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not hurt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if they do not move and do not feel pain when they are held and do not hurt, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the patient is healed, if you put the cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if these similar things come to the spine of the back, and you do not know whether it is healthy or not, pay attention to whether its tendons are relaxed, and to the accident that caused it, whether it is in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and excretion without will; and when it has been treated with a poultice on its stomach, if there is excretion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is treated with a poultice on its back and it becomes hard, then it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: do not work at all in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then it is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you treat him if there is an abscess, put oil or lard on the spine or on the back, as long as it is soothed; then put on one of the plasters that confort and dry, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain, until it is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is separated, cover it with wool; then tie the bone, and join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment, carrying it away with a cart, until it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called "bone of the cow", if you have a pouch, put it in your left hand, and make it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and wood to it, if you need it; then tie it up, and if there are any bones that have been separated, press them together, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the leg
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	May there be a slight break in the leg, and if so, let it not go beyond a little shortening of the bone; and make it long and level with the hip, and let it come to the patient's pain, and swelling, and let the broken part heal.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the reset so is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top joint, so make that break even as long as it is in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it leans inward, so make the sick person sit up on his stomach, as long as the reset of that break is arranged for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you put on the plaster, then put on a piece of wood or a beam, and reset the break so that it does not move; and fix the joint of the sides as even as possible.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And order the sick person to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes out, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calmed down, and put on what we have mentioned above; and then return to the reset, and hold it as it should be, unless there is a bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	and tie the two ends together, and cut them high up, and cut the patient on one side; then put the broken end into a basket of wood, and on top of something heavy or a weight, then tie the two sides together, so that the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	and the other way is that you put the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his neck, then order two ministers: one holds what is on top of the break in your hands, and the others hold it down at both ends, and spread each one out to its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too strong, then hold back the ligature of the rupture, and above the rupture, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the rupture is near the shoulder blade, then you should put the ligature of the rupture and another one on its side, above the rupture; and also if the rupture is on the side of the neck, then you should put the ligature lightly, without straining, until the rupture is even on its side and on the neck; then make the rupture even as it should be, and hold it, so that the abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscesses come, do not hold back on the extraction for more than seven days, and put a moist poultice on it quickly with rose oil, until the abscesses are calmed; then extract them, and the way to extract them is that you put the plaster on the rupture, then raise the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the back; and wrap the bandage around it, and extract it above the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm remains in a good position, without any obstacle to it, or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the nose does not move, if you use props, and put on the break a prop wider and stronger than the others, and keep between each prop two spaces, and make each prop so large that it passes three times through the fracture; then strain onto the props, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the props and the strain, as we have said, during the hour that you restore the member, and doubt the abscess is hot, let it lie tied for seven days, as we have said; then watch each day for three days to see if the itch does not spread or come to the place, or if the pain does not return to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If prescribed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If no such accident occurs, if only the shoulder is dislocated and not otherwise injured after three or more days, and the patient sleeps on his back with his hands on his stomach; then fasten the aid with one cow's hide, smooth and even, and look every hour during the day or night, to see that the appearance of the limb does not change, or that the ligaments are not relaxed; if dislocated, treat it with the medicine we have described, and give the patient food as we have specified, in such a way that the food is at the first level of digestion. And when he begins to recover, let him be cautious.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is fitting that the aid and limb should be reset after forty days of all; and then it must be dislocated again, and baths given and medicine administered to remedy the dislocation.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if he is stiffened and bogged down, it will take him a day or two months to recover.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "scapula" and the "humerus," with the former being smaller and located at the front of the shoulder, and the latter being larger and positioned behind it; occasionally, one of these bones may break on its own, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the smaller bone is broken, restoration is easy and healing follows; but when the larger one is broken, it is a more difficult case of healing, and worse than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the smaller bone is broken, it is necessary to gently extend it and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If only the larger bone is broken, it is necessary to more forcefully extend it; place it on one knee, and tilt the arm toward the body using the forearm as support, with the palm facing outward; the patient should cross his other arm across his body, and a helper should use their forearm to support the extended arm, with the palm facing inward. A second assistant should then support the patient's other arm at the elbow, and another person should hold the patient's opposite leg, pulling it slightly forward and upward.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then make the wound equal, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, each one be placed in its place, and if any of them are loose so that they do not hold the cure, and you cannot put it back in its place, then do this to the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break there is a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take care of the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the restoration there come pustules that are hard, I will cover them with a cloth made of rosin oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I will cover it from above gently, until the hard pustules are softened.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerottle from the bone and put on the plaster of the powder mill with plenty of resin, because I will put on the splints, and let the splint of the break be closer together than others, and farther apart if the break is in one or two bones; and stretch it up higher than any other part, and always less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the ink; and may the cloth that is on the break be soft and wet, and not too hard or rough; and may the thread from which it is stretched be made of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And treat the limb and the lien for a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, let it be soaked with lukewarm water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb not be tightly wrapped up to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then start again the extraction, and if the ligature is soft and the bone is exposed, and similar things, let it be done with care.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the limb cannot be bent, because it is too tight, let it be loosened a little and left for a few days until the stiffness passes, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, let him not be dislocated for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Ou en qui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.
de la brisure de la main	In cases of hand fractures, the hands should be held close to the neck, with the wrists kept even and immobile, and they should sleep on their backs. Know that this fracture can heal in 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the properties and complexions of the virtues.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand, and between the two hands, there are often cracks, and it only comes to a few.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or split, so that the patient suffers a severe pain, and sits upright properly and evenly; then he places his hand on an extended towel, and extends the broken bones, and joins them together, making sure they are well joined; then he applies plaster and splints, if there is no abscess, then put a bandage according to the quantity of the place; and it should be wrapped in I drapery of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks within the پارتن between the navel of the plant, then make a spear of drapels, and instruct the patient that he strangle his broken plant with his mouth; and then extract it with a long drapeil, and let it be as large as the plant of the hand, and extract it, as it is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the end, then it is appropriate that you put a stake on it, and another deso in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and stop the flow between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of the two, it is appropriate that you make it even, as it is appropriate; and extract it with the plant, and if you see that you have to put a small straight stake to raise the break, so that it does not move; and if the break is at the other two, as in the index or one of the others, make it even, and tie it to the healthy one that comes after; or you tie them all together, that it moves, or you put a stake on it, as if you throw it; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme heat, and help those who come to it, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the chest breeze
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the chest are sometimes bruised, and we can clearly see when they turn before and behind; and the restoration is thus: if one ties them together above the bruise, and another under it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the sick person lies down on his face; then each minister lays his bandage evenly on his part; and that is when the break occurs in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the chest, then one of the bindings goes towards the knuckle, and the other binds under the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the kneecap, and then one of the bindings goes towards the kneecap, and the other under the break; then put the bone back in its natural position with his two hands, and then apply plaster and wrap it up, so that the incision comes out clean.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, so he leaves it to soothe then return to your work and your cure; the time is done in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, so he leaves it to soothe then return to your work and your cure; the time is done in some way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it falls, and turns away from what it came to, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold on, let them be pulled hard; and if they cannot be pulled, let the place be split and pulled out firmly; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the cuff broken with these straps, as with the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in this restoration made there is no sound for the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the cuff is restored in a day, or little more or less, according to the various complexities of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the corner of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the corner of the knee there is little breaking, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, there is only a split or a hole, and comes to all the pain, and this hurts less.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts equal to two, as long as it is assembled, so that it can move; then put the plaster, and put a round stake if you need one, and hold it as it should be, then reward all the conditions that we have said in other breakers, such as hot abscess and others similar; then put to each accident what it deserves, until it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	From the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Sache that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; it happens to them as to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same for both; the wounds are also all the same. And if the two bones break together, the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his nose is fragile, turn back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then one will feel great pain and see it well; and turn away.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then bring out the limb, and make it even, and tie the joints evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that his fracture be ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension be smaller and lighter; and make it even according to your art.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two long branches of fir tree that purple the leg on one side and the other, and are long from the ankle to the tip of the leg; then wrap them around it above and below, and tie it tightly in the middle, so that the leg does not lean to the right or the left, and so is good; and no one should administer a bers out of the long leg, and if it is fir, and put the leg to keep from moving, and properly make one in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; then cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but at the foot there is a break in some cases and not in others, and it has only broken in many cases of disposition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break at the foot, and you see these bones come together, so that the person puts his foot on the ground like this, as if he wants to walk; then now place your foot on its side, let those bones rise again, then press them until they return to their places; then apply plaster and put it on, and put a small board under the heel of the foot, then tie him up with bandages, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if the swelling goes down, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any two broken, if they are restored, as we said to the two of the hand; then put on one of the broken a stone according to its length from the two, and let it be a little wider, then tie the wet that I said, and strain it forward; and if there are II or III or more, broken, then put on each two a stone according to its quantity, wrapped in I linena cloth, and strain the wet out of the foot; and being on top of the head of the wet is far from the belly of the foot, so that he well color.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to the other breakers, since we have said; and take care of each accident as it happens.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's nature is bruised, if she is seated enlarged, then lean her to the back part of the buttocks and hold her there behind; then fill the vase with the disease of cotton, and put in it as big as I stand; then undress the woman, and turn her back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entry of nature, and returns the bone with the back; and when she urinates, if she jumps the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and so do for seven days or more: then will be restored the bruise, and she will see, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a cord to the pubis, and pour all the bladder into nature; then blow in the cord forming, until the bladder is gone inside: nature will then return the bruise; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the jaw of man or woman is broken, if it be mended as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use to it, and hears my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means many things about the right way of restoration: hear then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the neck, when it is broken, take an goose's throat and put it on the neck; then wrap up a cloth around it, and let it be for three days or more, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, as in the hip bone or shoulder or other limb, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have spoken of bear witness to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals well, if the vinager remains, then you should start to restore the broken part in that same hour, or on the day when the blisters do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the blisters come, and you leave it to restore only until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm and not touched again in three days or four, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible above the skin, then it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, at small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal to your hands in length, then take this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight lengths, and whose width is determined by the quantity of the wound; and for this one is used to the hand that it grasps three or four, according to what it requires in each cure of a broken part; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member at your work, and be sharp in front and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palanche," for it is necessary that the shoulder blade be placed on top of the head of the bone; and it is to be bent once, until it returns, and even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is small, and the instrument cannot take hold of the bone well, then you must chop off the head of the bone until the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with a suitable instrument, either an incision or a saw, within your power; then remove that which is remaining in the bone by roughness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its natural position, then dip the dressing in black vinegar and apply it properly; and do not put on cotton or any other oil there, lest it bring about pus and corruption; and administer the poultices when you have reset the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around it, according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the patient, and has brought about death or corruption in no instance; and the instruments for breaking are softer and more pliable than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is big or bad, and you doubt that a worse accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, it is not right to put splints on; but wrap it up tightly, in place of splints, with hard drape, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days a bow to the wound, if the bone that you have put on comes off entirely, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, if healing ointment with four-fold action and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is fixed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be out of joint in such a way that the bone moves down leicht.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day passes, and it cannot be fixed but comes off again, knowing that there are small pieces of bone that bring about the pain, then you must cut the wound with a knife, and remove all these unhappy pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is a fistula or another type of corruption, you must treat it according to what was said in the chapter on the paste mentioned above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if the bone is broken and opened up on the member, as in the case of the hip or shoulder bone, or other large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death results, but leave it so that it may rot; perhaps after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the rust that comes from iron
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	come to us many times after the health of the breaker, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make the limbs move naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care, therefore, if we are fresh: give them stinking medicines, as balm, incense, myrrh, and sarc콜, acacia, and similar ones; so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine, or with a lot of vinegar, or with ash; and put them on the lump, and tighten it well, and do not release it for many days; and then loosen it, and start another, until the nodules are hard; or you hold it to a sharp razor; because the property of the soap is that it hardens all the swellings on the limbs; and if the nodule has turned hard like stone, it needs to be cut out, if there is an excess, and let it dry, or you will not cure it.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after rest
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and there remains after weak and slender members, for diverse reasons: because one is too tightly tied, and was not tied as it should have been; or because he has too many ligaments, and cannot come into contact with the member; or because of many swellings; or because of great movements, not in his time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until the blood multiplies in him; and give him baths, and offer him pleasure and exercise; then put resin on the member, so that the resin attracts great nutrition, and drenches it often with warm water, until the nutrition flows to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two tortured limbs after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after recovery, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, however it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that you must break a member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; these practices are blamed, and great harm and sometimes death result; nevertheless, if the nodules and torments are fresh, they should be soaked in warm water or cooked herbs are used, as foils of walleye, roots, and melilote, and similar things; and the salve should be softened with a good oil, such as dyaquillon well made, and you take the muskellunge of walleye, and confound it with sheep's fat or sesame oil, and make a poultice; or you take figs, and crush them with hay of corn, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And there is no time when the shoulder is dislocated by constantly and repeatedly rubbing with damp hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be no movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the limb is twisted and hardens like stone, it must be opened with a sharp tool lightly, and covering the bone, and making a cut, and putting vinegar and studying in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back by gentle movement.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, and the joints grow larger, and by chance do we reset to its place; because then it cannot be moved at all: many times this causes pain and other pains; but when this will come, if you make the patient well, then leave him, until the abscess is calmed down; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then move it slightly, and cure each limb as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the ointments for dislocations of the shoulder joint until the tip.
des mandibules	of the mandible
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Now it has happened that the mandibules have dislocated and they are in two ways: where they are a little out of place and stiff a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down to the chest, and cut off the salive from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return it by means of several movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must quickly reset it in the hospital, and do not delay at all; and in this way that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and pour a little ointment from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, there are two parts to the dislocation; and the other two hands should be away, to make it even; and order the patient that his mandibules be softened, and moved in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the mirror be equal, until it revives in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And let them be brought back gently, even if both mandibles are together, but heat and oil are brought to them as soon as they are taken off, so that they are gently brought back; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are gently brought back and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softener, place it on cloth soaked in wax made of oil and wax, then lightly move it around while it is still warm; and let the sick person sleep on their back, and their shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move from side to side or struggle to turn over, but rest legily, until the pains are gone and the mandibules are well healed. And then eat lightly, and do not try to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well healed and pain-free.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and sudor will come of custom, and peradventure a solution from the belly, and per aventure vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and often dies he who has it, within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	Does not dislodge from within the continuation of the et from the foot, and is dislocated no more than once to the side, and it feels very much.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and bandage, and bind it; and the jaw which is towards his chest cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates no more than once, then you return it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it, and command to the patient that he rest until he is well; and so also is the head of the shoulder returned when dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Saiches that the shoulder can dislocate in three ways: either because one of its parts comes out of place with respect to the other; and the second is at the base of the arm; and sometimes it dislocates upward, which happens little; and it never dislocates behind or inside; and many times it dislocates forward towards the shoulder, but in those who have a little cart, because it will need to be hospitalized; and in those who have enough cart, it is not necessary to do anything, and return to their homes.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there are homes where they hit or break it, and the shoulder inflames with heat, and one thinks that it has dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So then you must test it, until you are sure of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And there comes the dislocations when it is swallowed into the axilla, and distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and sever the axilla at the top of the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move from any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, then it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly on the top; and this way of dislocation is not a reason to return, when it is new, or if the person is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers lift up the hand of the sick man, then put your slings off the axilla, and lift up the joint by force to the place; and the ministers lift up the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so comes gradually.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our days later, it is convenient that the patient be bathed in hot water; and give him a soothing and relaxing enema, as an infusion of althaea and fenugreek and melilote in water, and let him be sat on; then let the back of the patient be warmed with a warm cloth, not too hot or too cold, and put the stirrup over his shoulder, and gently lift the patient's arm; and give another minister to lift the patient's arm, so that it does not move; this shoulder returns all at once, and if you do it according to this way: and it is that you make present a man who is greater than the patient; and let him stand on his right side, and take the back of the patient's seat, and lift up the seat, so that the patient hangs in the air; and give another ministers to draw the patient's arm down towards his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, without anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if you also do it in another way: and is it that a long stick is placed in the ground, whose head is also like a pistol, and is not too large or too small; then let the patient lie on his back on the end of the stick; then let him extend his hand on either side forming a line, and the joint will return to its place peacefully; and if it does not come back for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick from the two arms of a great tree and four fingers wide, which has the head turned by completely entering under the axletree, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then lie on the top of the stick drapelsouez, that the fust does not scarce lou malaide, then put it under the axletree; and extends som arms on the top of the long stick, and places the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on an eschillon of a big tree, and let the hands extend downstream, and let the body hang from one side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is on, in any way that it may be, it is necessary that you put upon the shoulder an equal sphere of wool, then place the plaster prepared from powder from the mill, with incense and honey of bees, over all the shoulder and back, then remove the ring from the shoulder forward, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at his neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck a little while until the members are comfortable, for he will heal more quickly; and then suck more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is firm and has not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or some other cause, it is necessary that you administer the cauterizations three times, as it is placed in front or with the paste of the cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it slides after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm upstairs, then know that the nerves in the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint has never been placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the dislocation that is towards the back of the hip, and the glutes, or behind, is made by a blow, and stretching of the hands, and I administer another place; and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes greasiness to the member, and tardiness in movement, then the patient uses oil many times, until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated to a degree, and dislocates again; and it is dislocated from all sides, most of all in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we see it well and feel it well; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as the shoulder joints come out, because if they come out the way they come in, then it would be painful to set them back; and by chance it cannot be reset all at once from all sides, most especially when it is behind; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and by chance it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is done, when she is so that you can reset her, that you extend her hand with your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of her hand according to the sound side, forward and backward, and press the joint back into its palm roots together, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if it is dislocated in front, he returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and he feels at the root of the palm which is dislocated from the outside.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, he ministers a strong extension; and it is that two minister extend the arm, and they color them two, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see him join the joint to his hand, then oile it of any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until he recovers; and when it is in its place, put it on plaster dry with honey of thyme, and strain it firmly, and wrap the arm around the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well set, then recommence the plastering and binding and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint is moved and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is eased; or put on the joint a wet sheep's fur, then leave it for a day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or swim; and when it sweats, rub the joint well, then put the fur back on, and then enter or swim; and do this II times or III, until it is healed; and if you see, then put on a wet sheep's skin heated with butter, and strain it over; then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is less severe than that of other joints, however it must be brought back into place carefully during the dislocation, so that the joint does not swell or that there is no abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you bring it back, put the sick hand on a table and extend the fingers, and make them even so that they rest against the joint, and bring them back in this way; but it is necessary to watch carefully that they are placed correctly; then place the patient's hand with its back on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand with its back on the table, and make the joint appear to the patient's eyes.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, this is good; but if not, if the extraction of the pustules that have broken out apains them, and so leaves them with a bad taste.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it to its place after several days, if the joint twists; and there is no benefit to the patient without breaking the nerves or arteries: then you know that the nerve are cut, or the arteries; so you must extract it by a delicate cautery, and perhaps there is nothing else to be done.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, if you put on the poultice that we have said, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then remove it and leave it again.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, if he dips it in hot water, and rubs it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not dislocated to each side, not on the back of the palm or the belly; so they are, and pull the dislocation to your knuckles until it comes back, then support the head of the finger with your thumb, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it there for a day, and then put it back even that day; and from nut, if he has been dislocated on the belly of the hand, do so often as it is stiff, and all as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same, when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder at the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for it kills the patient quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens Whisthleb, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee "gilbositez": li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from falling or strikes or similar things, the ancient ways of cure with great words, which did not bring much good; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the Gilbosity that comes from behind, one does not have to cure or heal; and also those that come straight on both sides, and can only be cured properly who comes from behind, as I said; it is that the sick person be extended on his face in an equal position, and has a strain of it, so that he does not bleed; then lay one ember on the head forming a ground, and another to the feet, and tie a string to the back of the sick, and another to the ankles, and two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other to the feet, among the two embers; and let them be well closed, the ember as we have said before, and the mirior puts his palms on the spine forming, until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, then take a bowl of three arms long, and cover the wall, and let the patient be on the side, and pour the head of the bowl over the wall, then put the middle of the bowl on the spine; and place the tips of his fingers on the other head of the bowl, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see that, do so with the knob that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And that you stick two torches to the head of the sick person with an arm long, and place the tips of the other two on top, and put a palm of space of length between each torch; and in each torch have a hole where the turner runs, and let the torch firmly into the ground so that it does not move; and between each pair of torches have one turning torch, so that the string turns, and have two small torches of a palm of length to turn the turner; and then bind the knot that is among the strings to the turner at the head, and the other knot to the tips on the other turner, and let each servant turn his torch on all the string, and the master put the spine in line as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et when it is even, put upon it dry plaster with much urine, and then the stakes, and then the stem of a tablet of three inches long, that purplish may take up its place in the bosom of the glutus and the part of the spine sound, and bind with a thread, as we have said, and use on the patient subtle fasting, until he is well; and if any thing comes at the end of the health, then administer medicines softening and soothing, with the stem that we have said above; and never do I administer a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come in the posterior spine of the back, and take care that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, so that one must not have presumption: per adventure would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	the hips
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the joints of the hip and shoulder only come about due to dislocations, not at all like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parties: inward and outward, and before and behind; and more inward there, and less dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations inward is that when one joins the wounded leg with the sound, it is more distant, and the patient's knees are farther apart than those of the sound; and the patien'ts cannot double his knee in front; and it is the place that is swollen hot with an abscess, for this reason the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes outwardly is that this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it comes before are that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double his knee in pain, and when one forces him to go, he cannot walk forward, and he holds back his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he goes, he goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that person who has it behind, if he can not spread his knee, nor double it, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the joint is softened, and the hip bone is in place between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And those who bring this kind of dislocation should know that if the dislocation is old and does not improve with time, there will be no cure for it; and it is only due to pride.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is new, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset the joint, and turn it inward and outward, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back into place, and there will be no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not come back in this way, you must bring two strong ministers and hold the leg very firmly with them, or tie it to the ground; and let another minister extend his hand above and below in such a way that he pinches his hands together, then take him by the hip bone; and let others pull at the foot; and they should all move at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground, and remain still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is so common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then it is necessary to put the cure to its form When the dislocations are in the shoulder, then it is necessary that you support the patient on his back, then place the bandage over the root of the chest, and the bar that is away from the armpit, then extend the bandage up towards the armpit, and down towards the forceps; then pinch another minister his arms, and embrace the large bar of the chest malady, and extend it in a twist form: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot do this way that we have said, it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage around the heels and knees, and let the leg be extended twice as far as the other; then hang him by the head from a pole, and have his two arms outstretched; then command another minister to embrace the root of the chest, and have other ministers hanging with the patient who embrace the chest, for the joint returns now gradually.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are in the other place, so he lies down the patient, as we said in that which has gibositeit, and draws out the threads properly on the bad leg, and also on the foot; then set II torches, I to the head and another to the toe, then put one torch between the legs of the patient by his side the shape; and have planted wet flagels around, so that it does not burn the patient, then extends each minister towards him, and he puts his hand equal to his dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a . table, and press him so as we have said in the gibosité, and lie down the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are in front, so extend the bad leg carefully, and according to what I said; and put the patient's pain on the bad ankle, then press with the other hand, and stretch it down towards the kneecap.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are on the side, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward, nor to raise him up from the ground; but it is necessary that he be placed as if he were in bed with his back and legs extended as we have said above; and press down on the joint at the table; and it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then spread out the knees, apply the plaster, and tie a bandage around them so that the leg does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage, and cause the animal to bark loudly until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the hip joint:
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The genous are dislocated according to three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; and not in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient that he bend his leg to his foot, and if it does not [bend] at his foot, take note that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his kneecap with your palms, and pull between your two hands, and bend the two sides of the knee cap in form; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genous returns to its place, and the signs are that he [bends] his leg well at his foot slightly; and apply the plaster, and make him move his leg to his foot, and fasten them together firmly for three days or four, then let him go free; and do not work on the patient to walk until his members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, give a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the leg, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are not dislocated once and fully displaced inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is displaced, and try again at the part where it has been displaced: We must bring it gently to our hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is displaced all the way up, you must make the patient lie down on his back, and put the limb at rest on the ground, and then pull it gently with your hands toward you, holding it by the ankle; then try to bring the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, and then extend it upward, and blow gently on the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, in blowing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; if not, restart the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, you shall make the patient walk on his heels, and place the staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie the drape around it so that he does not fall; then put the minister on the knee, and another minister extends the foot at its rest to his hands or to the leg, that he may hold the limb; then the minister who is holding the limb makes sure that the dislocation is held in place with the drape, and other ministers pull the healthy leg forward, and the dislocation will return all the way.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it has set, then put on the plaster and press it down, and form the splint, and fasten the foot to the leg, and guard the tendons that are behind the ankle, so that the ligatures do not become too tight; then let him rest for two or three days, and the ligatures will become looser if the splint is left on; then remove the splint after three days or a quarter of a month, and let the patient walk after four days; and if he goes beyond that term, it is not yet certain that he has not dislocated again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscesses have opened, if it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it is necessary to move them without working, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et s'il est dislocé en aucun nu de dos de pied, si convient que tu fais asseoir le malade sus I leu plain ou sus table tot droit, et met ton pied sur ce qui aper de ces jointures, puis presse à ton pied forme tant qu'il revienne; et quand il est égal, et il n'i' aper rien, si met désoz la plante du pied une table à II chieus, puis l'estrain forme, et le laisse III jors, puis le délise; et le fais reposer, tant qu'il soit sané.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs with dislocation, and one must restore it, many times the patient has died: so be not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not learned in the art and have not long practiced it, and if you are not compassionate and slow, do not be haughty; and use at the beginning soothing ointments on the hot wound, and leave the patient to God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then now restore the member to its place, so that the hot wounds come; and when the member is in its place, administer soothing ointments, and cure the wound as I have said, of dried ointments; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are broken, then set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses; and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you much according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming and healing your body.
Amen	Amen
