O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the final word on medical science together with its explanations and clarifications.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this surgery, which is the work of hands, that is to say, "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And for this reason that the work of hands is practiced in our region and is taken from all over everywhere, it is because it is a difficult science and a demanding art, and there is no delay in its force except for the small descriptions in books of ancient times that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed up and science is remote.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can give it new life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the iron tools of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for this reason the art of surgery has been neglected in our country because there are no good surgeons.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in it must master the science of anatomy as Galileo says, as far as he knows the shape and connection and separation of the bones, and has knowledge of the muscles and nerves and joints and the number of bones, and the movement and flowing veins and resting veins, and their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that the right hand is not like the left, nor is the work like the hand, and most of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that if one does not know the things mentioned above, he must be careful not to make mistakes and not learn from experience; so I have often seen many of those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to theory and speculation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries in the neck; so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he brought out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen it said that if you treat the patient properly, the condition of the patient and the size of the stone are well-known, and he would certainly die if treated this way.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who caught a duch of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breaking he got a wound; and the foolish doctor, out of ignorance, cut the break close to the wound with a sharp knife, leaving no scar on the wound, and left it so; and commanded that he not remove it; and delayed it so that the leg was completely mangled and the foot was lost in the end.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to bring the leg out; and when I took it out he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways that the member is corrupted are already confirmed, and cannot be healed; and the corruption does not cease to spread through the member as long as the members are completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder which will destroy the abscess and putrefaction, and then inflame by the evil of its mastery.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is purred out with melancholic humor, one must touch it with iron if it is in the right place so that one can completely destroy what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, trachy filz, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger and fear in many things; and I will show in each of these chapters in this book where there is peril and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For if you keep this in mind, so that the foolish gaze cannot speak ill of you; If you take your weapons in agreement, and attack your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are delivered; and leave behind the expected diseases of grief health; And hold your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiée provided some of his advice thus: "Do not take on yourself the care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and medicinal water, and the following chapters are ordered from the top down to the bottom, and the shapes of instruments, and the ironing tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about tailoring and piercing, suction cups and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and torquing, and similar things; and it is ordered that the heads of the screws be smooth, and the forms of instruments be laid out.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of the aid and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the most distant word, subtile science, and secret answers; and many wise men would speak about it, and agree with what I say; and I am short of words because I shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that universal aid cauterizes all colors having matter, except for two types of color: that is to say, hot color with matter and dry color with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, some devised and said that cautery is great help; and another said the opposite: that cautery does not deserve to be sick of heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and must not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor from dryness; and he who says that cautery does great help to the hot and dry disease which comes in courses to men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all way, nothing but fire enters into it save he who has tried it, and knows by long practice the character of the ointment of cautery, and the differences in the complexions of men, their dispositions, and causes of their diseases, and also the seasons; for we fear not any other complexion, even if it be cold or moist, in diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the hair should grow together and agree with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery is more effective if it causes discharge of cure, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member unless by chance.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by spreading, and bring about the malady of healing; and by chance fire, because of its height and because of its substance's goodness, does not do this unless there is surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And which I have found by experiment and through the long service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the truth of things; and therefore I beg your pardon for the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret of what has been found out about fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at a certain time, and let them be prayed.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is fitting in all seasons, for by the aid of the cauterization the impending harm is prevented; and most importantly, the cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait for the season when greater ill may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, son, as they do in the field; for to the illness that is healed by cauterization there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they believe, because cauterization is nothing more than a medicine that changes the color, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more efficacious than medicine in terms of haste in its effect, and for its virtue and majesty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there are times when the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and useless things are gathered within him by acquiring flesh and similar things, unless cauterization is administered in which he has a little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizing thickly because of the pain, and similar things, and that part of the pain does not return again but it occurs a little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand at all because cauterization is called the tears of medicine, and that's it; but they don't believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and cauterization is the tears of medicine for this reason that whenever we administered ways to treat diseases in any disease they do not deserve, therefore let us administer cauterization, and it deserves.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, open well that cauterization is the tears of medicine, not at all according to the intentions of the foolish.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Li ancien dirent que cauteres d'estrument d'or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualitet de l'or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n'est mie ver car je l'ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c'est ver en aucuns homes; et cauteres d'or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	The ancient ones said that gold instruments for cauterizing are more effective than those of iron, and they only mentioned the qualities of gold and its high purity because of its effect on healing; They said that the heat from gold instruments does not cause inflammation, but this is not true as I have proven it, for I found that in some cases it can cause inflammation; And gold cauterizing tools are more effective than iron, as they claim. However, when you heat a gold instrument, it does not take long to cool down; and if you heat it too much, it will burn in the fire, and thus there is sufficient prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For I have ordered you this chapter of the treatment of the eye, since it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Or aultre ai ordeneit de cautere de la peitrine comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	And for this I have ordered fire cautery for the head, which should be applied to the patient so that the hair remains long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them still so they do not move until they grow. This cauterization is useful in case of moisture and cold on the head, and because of many humors that descend from the hair and ears, and for a multitude of dreams and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and most especially for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis and soda and apoplexia and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a solution medicine which cleanses the head III or IIII, according to what the virtues and the ease and the habit of the patient can bear; and then do again the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then do sit the crosswise between your hands, and put his hands on his neck; after place the root of your two palms on the root of his neck between his II hairs; and let come your two hands, if it bleeds from then then heat the cautery which is called "olive", by which this form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the signet of ink, and do going down and extract your hand pokey and poky returning; then let your hand alone, and reward the place where you see the bone I small; and if you don't see it, then continue the cautery as long as you see the bone like I told you; after take I piece of string, and put in weep and cotton, and put on the mark, and let it be for so long that the heating is done; then cure the wound with an ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon" until it is well.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And said the old man, that the longer the wound is open, the more it bleeds; and for this reason if it is moved.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said none of these that one must let the cautery burn as much of the bone as possible, and then mend what is burned of the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And said another that one must let the cautery burn as high as possible, and then push it so hard that the humors come out of the bone; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must mend and heal.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of burning do not seem good to me in all cases, except for some people where it is possible to fear; and I think that I should leave it open, because the head is weakened by continuous nature solutions, as we witness with other limbs; and even if the head of the sick is weak from nature, and the first cauterization seems more safe and soft to me, and I use it in such a way that it heals.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old age pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, then use herbal remedies and pills that are called "cochier", and head cooling and oils and poultices; and if one makes the fire cautery which we have just mentioned, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient is of a strong nature, and is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery as described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the fire cautery over each hair of the head up to the bone, as we have just said, and making a hole where one calls it "vasselz"; and set the ventuse; and adjust your hand so that you do not see it up to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it is good that fire cauterizes over each hair of the head are smaller than those over which one cauterizes the skin of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and it extends to the oil, and the headache has been cured with medicines that are contrary to water, and all else has failed: then let the fire cauterization be done according to two ways, that is to say, with aqueous medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery of aqueous medicine: that is to say, you squeeze a date of aloes and remove the peel and the core in two pieces like the head, and then you place it on the temple or at the root where the pain is, in such a way that you can dip the aloes in wax; and when it has been dipped, leave it there for twelve hours; and then take it off and treat with an aloes date, and leave the wound for two or three days; and then put cotton soaked in oil over it until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the healing process as long as he is healthy; and if you see any of the medicines I have written about in this chapter on burning medicines, take them as directed.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if done like this.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "close" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has I hole of a corbeur, and middle to a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little bit, until the halfway of the keur (bone) is burned; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is further away, and runs a lot of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that put cotton in the form of thread, and place it on the spot for three days; then dip the cotton in oil, and then heal the spot with the healing process as long as he is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer called "cultellare", all over the tip, and be careful not to seal the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	for headaches: When you treat headaches as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery described at the beginning of this medicine and the iron does not help him; therefore it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and so sign on the sore spot a line half a inch long, and hold your hand once, and lift it up so that you do not cover the artery and do not come up to the bone; and guard against the mandible that moves when you stretch, and let the rest remain as it is, and that spasms do not come to the disease, and guard against the escape of blood from the artery when it is covered, or if it has escaped, there is great fear and most of all to those who do not know it, and who are students and untested; and let the work remain in its place; but I will tell you how to stop headaches when the artery is blocked, and I will show you at what point it hurts in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteurs do not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with fire at the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautores that we have said or the chapitre of extraction of the artery, with the cauteur that has II knives; and this cauteur is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold weather
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold weather, and one has applied giải độc và các phương pháp điều trị khác như chúng ta đã nói trong phần phân chia, và cơn đau không thuyên giảm, thì hãy sử dụng loại lửa gọi là 'poins', hình dạng của nó như sau:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have made the whole ear that is sore, or the two sides, where there is pain, warm up with fire a little distance from the root of the ear then, as you have marked the place, make X points in each ear; after that, cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	that must be cured by fire is only for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and not to make fire for similar things that come from heat and salt of the sea.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this torture of the mouth that moves with fluid from sea water and sputum from the throat and gargling, and it is not worth it, then you must make three fire treatments: one at the root of the ear, another a little further forward on the temple, and the third between the two lips; and place the fire in the healthy part, and let the fire burn halfway through; and this is the form of the fire treatment:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and needs the blade to be a little thicker; after healing the place as I have said above, as long as it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then do IV cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I apply the vessel as we have said before, and the after-cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured as we have said above.
de litargie	of lime
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient many years and pills to clean out the brain; after cutting off the head of the patient completely, and placing on the occipital lobe thyme extract which is written or used to make plasters; and that is the way of the cauterization: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is well thus far, it is good; and if not, he shall have three fire cauteries to the top of his head, descending to the collar, and leaving space between each cautery two inches wide; and the cure as for the others, and if you see him jerking, and the patient suffers, then a fire cautery in the middle; and it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and the cure until he is well; and be the cauteries which are called "olivare," as I have said above.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed with water and with what we have said above; after that, the doctor should wash the patient's head, then he shall make a fire cautery to the top of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three in the middle of the back of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers and the disease persists, then he shall make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and he shall leave it until the first cure is burned, and lower his hand; after that, the cure until he is well, and be the cauteries which are called "olivare" as we have said above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy One should use fire cautery only for those who are febrile, and first to irrigate the brain and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on treatment when the patient is great and suffering from feverish medicines.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot endure the fire, let him gargle and chew, irrigating the brain often with good meat; then let him lie down in the middle, and let him be cauterized according to what we have said above, and cauterize his neck, and each of his horns; and if the patient is parched and suffering, let him be cauterized as I have said before to those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be with olive oil according to the way I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is infected, make a fire cautery using this method.
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted moisture and thick pus, then make half fire cautery as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy there is decline of excesses to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he should drink something that will clear the brain, according to what we have said in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After re-establishing the head of the patient; after making a well-formed turban out of linen, also as a circle, put it on the head; and let the patient sit with his back supported and his legs well supported; then apply the poultice, and moisten it with old sheep's butter; and heat it moderately at the fire, so that he can bear it; after which empty the turban from the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with another good treatment, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if you see cauterize him by making points many times over all the cauterizer.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing dries out the brain slowly; and then put cotton wet with vinegar in butter and with cow's fat.
de l’awe des eulz	with the eyes closed
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes to the eyes first as signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient this purifying thing for the head, and guard against all moisture, and make him sweat or bath many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that he orders to rub his head, and makes him sweat or bath many times while fasting. After this he does the cauterization on the head, and does two cauterizations on the temples so that they are dry together, each one next to the other; and guard against the blood coming out of the vein, and if you see too much blood flowing, then stop it with a cloth so that it does not flow.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of cauterizing how you shall stop it; and never is cauterization done or hatred by cutting away the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The two hearts of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and lie on the veins, or draw the arteries that are in appearance at the top of the head; and one can see that it is of cold, phlegmatic superfluity, then do the cauterization that I have said at the beginning of the awed descending to the tears: I cauterize the top, and two cauterizes on the two temples, and two cauterizes where they cut away the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes it well above the ear with all small cauterizes.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The hearts of tears inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you use the medicines according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then done so much that he drinks three times with the medicine of the sick; after him he takes the head, and makes cauterization at his middle with olive cautery; and makes two cauterizations of the cautery called "clavis" on the two sorrows, a little more than the hair; and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	from this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the two sorrows as long as the sorrows are; and do not let your hand rest until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	hair that points to the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has come when the hair of the oils are converted to the parakeet, and touch the oil, and it is done on two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and equal, then place the patient in your care; afterwards, sign on paper a figure that is also like the fur of the mirth, and is the beginning of the signature of the hairs; then put cotton soaked in wax and muskelloge of persillion on the oil, then heat the cautery so that this is the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the affected area little by little several times, so that the scar is burned there; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then put your hand down, and leave it like this for III days, and then put cotton soaked in water in a poultice until the scorching is removed; after treating with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hair comes back, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on that middle point as you did first; and if the hair are gone, then cauterize until the paper is returned to its natural position, and is even, and does not touch the hair the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cautery is that you command the patient to leave the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf; then take of French soap and hot water, of each a .Z., and grind them well together; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then in spreading on the shape that you made like the bay leaf leaf, put on the paper eyes; and if the illness is only in one oil spot, then must be applied in I too, and also in both feet; and moisten with cotton soaked in water in a box of ointment; and the patient's chiés should be in your hand and place your palm on the medicine, and press it little by little every time that the patient feels tingling from the medicine, for he feels tingling too like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have had this for a long time, take this medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the medication is no longer necessary, then remove the bandage from the wound, and inspect it to see if the skin has healed as if it had been lifted by fire or cut; and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then continue to apply medicine to the wound as long as your cuts are still open and your hair is not yet grown in; then put cotton wetted with linseed oil on it until the scar tissue has healed, which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to, then wrap your wound carefully so that the medicine does not get on the hair.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft and the hair sticks into the oil, then start again with the medicine on the same spot that was softened by the paper, in the same way as you did before; after treating it, until it is well; and this is the form of the wound of the palm:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to what they can see; and do not give a straight answer to the one for whom the study of this art is required.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure for a fistula by caustic
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform a caustic cure according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip cotton wicks in wine or cranberry juice on oil; then heat the caustic substance; and apply it to the scalp as if it were the form of a dove's feather; together, let the hair be burned from one side of the head to the other, and let it hang down like a tent, but nevertheless, let it burn well for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is opened, and treated with poultices, and dried; and if it is closed, then treat it forcefully, and after put the hot cauldron firmly on, and hold your hand to the cauldron at the part of the nape behind the oil, that your hands do not go wild; and put the cauldron into the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the cauterization just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cauterization once more, and if you need to do it again, leave it for III days; after put cotton soaked in butter on it, and cure with desiccating medicine until it is healthy, and if forty days have passed and it is still not healthy, then put medicine that corrodes onto the bone; and treat according to what came out in the chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way to cauterize a fistula, which no one of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Hear me out on a technique for cauterizing a fistula, something none of the ancient physicians have spoken of. Let's begin by identifying the location and then introducing a thin instrument to shape it properly:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And let there be the quantity of one .Z. of vinegar; and hold your hand firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, lest the vinegar corrode its oil; and it is right that you put cotton wadding wet with vinegar over the wound or bandage it: thus the vinegar will artfully find the site of the fistula, and cure it with a marvelous remedy.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula has been cured by the cauterization we have described, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then let him administer the pustule to the nose, and bring the fistula to the root of the nose according to that which is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	the furrows in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	For many times, furrows form in the lips, which are called "hair", and sometimes also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these furrows as we have described in the divisions, and the cure does not improve, then use a small surgical scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it carefully in the furrows as long as it comes out clean; after treatment, apply the balm of cerote until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after having made a poultice and covered it and it has become soft and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have described in the divisions, but it does not improve: then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having sealed or pierced the fistula, and keeping your hand there until the iron comes out at its base, and doing so once or twice, after treating as we have described in the treatment, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the pain of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are swollen with moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after that, heat the cautery so that its form comes out there in a certain way that you put a cord on the tooth; and place the cautery inside with great heat, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then let go of your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; then fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and leave it for an hour and rinse it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this manner, the tooth that was moving is set in place, and the gums that were swollen and sore are relieved and dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the tooth pain comes from cold, or when there is frost, and the medicines do not help, then one must use two kinds of cauterization: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's teats, and the tip in a spoon of iron or gold; after taking cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent, and the moisture in butter made, and put on the tooth aching badly and hold for as long as it is cooled; and thus often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and you see if such wet wool and cotton in butter freezes, and put on the aching tooth, and put on an iron hot until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Cautery with fire if it is such that you squeeze a iron or gold chain, and let it be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, so that its shape comes out, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will become severe on the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then suck it up; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauldron out of the skull that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the cauldron:
des scrophules	of scourges
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of cold moisture and do not submit to digestion with medicines, then heat the head-cauldron so that after comes the form, and has II openings for the fumes to rise to the cauldron on the other side; and put the cauldron hot on the abscess once, or where it is needed, as long as it comes to the root of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for III days; and put cotton wet with butter as far as the burning is over; then cure with oil and camphor as long as he is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures triumph over the nostrils and most especially when it comes from a cold complexions, then the patient should be voided first by medicinal liquids; afterwards, cauterize at the root of the throat, and keep back from the nose but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let be the cauterization which is called 'clavicle' so that we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the nostrils are cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor does he sweat, and the disease is old, then make him ij cauterizations on the nose in his holes; and another cauterization wet the pis between the breasts; and let be the cauterizations which are called 'clavicle' according to the form which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make the cautery by piercing all the cautery that is called "poins" from which its shape is as described in the disease of the ears; and let the points be until XXX or more, where it turns around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards, treat the place according to what is said above, and let the cauterization be for three rainings according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for these where the cautery is lighter, for those where you make III together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, be gentle with the patient on his back and sides; afterwards, lift up what is inside the little finger of your left hand; and if the joint turns inwards, then heat the cautery that has two nails here according to this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound as far as the rib until it is scarred, and the shape of the cauterization comes with 4 cauterizations; and because it is done with the cautery that has 3 wires, because the shape of the cauterization is made with 4 cauterizes; and the nerve is according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has 3 wires:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is applied on this nerve because there are 8 cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put the fire on the flesh with a torch and let it rest, and do not move the member for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, what happens then? So make the cauterization on the thick part of the cautery with a nail, or with many cauterizes piercing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed from the bones and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and moisture as long as it was extracted from its complexion, and there are many catarrhs to him, and to the usual methods of treatment he does not benefit, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From then on, make three fire cauterizations in the anus of the back for the quantity of two coins, all three cauterizations are clamped, and two fire cauterizations on either side as long as the shape of the cauterization is at three angles, and there is a space between them that they are not joined together when they move; and let the cauterization be so perfect that it burns both parts, and the shape of the cauterization is according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterized with a great fire according to this form; and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by puncturing and signing on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see from the head; then cauterize tothe whole fire which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment for the wound that we have had before, as long as it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it comes pain from cold and moisture and strong windiness, as long as it is removed from its natural constitution by the excesses; and the patient is treated for what we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, unless the patient is gentle on his own bile; and mark the shape of three cauterizes according to this form and quantity on the liver, leaving a space between each cautery the thickness of two fingers; and let the cautery be as long as the length of the trunk, and do not press too hard all the way down the cautery; and let it be burned with such heat that the half of the cautery is blackened, and let the patient lie on his side; and if he cannot, then let him stretch out his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterices of the cutlet, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the meat, for you would make the whole body parched; and let it come to a single eye, for the cure is very subtle in place, and the sauces so that one can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you must know whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, then feel the patient's pain is not too great; but if it is in the capsule, then feel the pain is very intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then, when this cure has ended the boils, the patient must be made to sneeze on his head; and then sign from above where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer that is similar to a blade, from which there is form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cauterize as long as the burn is hot, and comes only to seeping, until the scar is all healed; after the cure according to the cure of leeches as long as it is healthy; and it does not come to this cautery but only those who have studied medicine for a long time, and by whom these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may courageously act, and I think that it is better to let it be.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	For the pleurisy cautery: The old ones said that one must make a cauterization for pleurisy with root of arhatology, and in this way: Take a root of arhatology long, the longest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; and wet it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize between the nipple and the neck, and II small cauterizations a little lower down on the side that is sore; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining it a little behind; and I cauterize under the breast, and another one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and another one at the back of the shoulder from the previous one; and do not press your hand, but make it open as when you smell something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no old man used fire cautery resembling a razor, and sweeping it and placing it between the ribs until it comes to the aposteme; and he jumps out of pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes who cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they have three types of fire cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is that you do three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, so that the patient shivers on his back; and another way of cauterizing is that you sweep the cautery which has two ners, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and put the scald which is at the place of the mouse, or the cuts of the mouse come toward the left side, and let the elevatations which you scald according to the scald, according to the length of the torso, and the cautery be according to the width of the torso.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After the two nails have been burned for as long as the sound can be heard from the other side, then firmly apply the cautery, and in doing so you will have four. And if you see it, cauterize all of it with three.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has been kept wet for a long time, and this is what must be done before the other one mentioned above.
de ydropisie	droopy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery does not work for droopiness, except in the manner called "ascleotes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you cure according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the wound, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidney, and two behind the back along the spine, and one place under the pelvis. And let the cauterization be close to the skin of the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the fire cautery to go the long time corruption, and do not let the cure of the sick after the cautery; and the recovery would be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is the clove that we have before us; and this for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described here.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the skin
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the skin is swollen on the person who is dysenteric and is yellow in color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow color be turned away, and the cautery is made according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the fire cautery, make two cauterizations on each leg up to the toenail; and let one cauterization be long, one before the kneecap and one behind, between the legs; and leave the cauterizations above for a long time without treating them, because they will come off by themselves; after that, treat the other leg with the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach solution comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and healing virtues that are in the stomach and in the small intestine remain intact, and cannot be cured by any remedies; and you will see the patient suffer greatly and have great strength, so do a great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or a cautery of the stomach, a circlet; and four cauterizations around the anus carefully, one cautery under the testicles.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make cauterization on his knuckles, and I cauterize each finger, and II small cauterizations on the stomach tenderly the great, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and have large cold and moist pus, and are cured as we said in the divisions, and it does not benefit, then do cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, that which is all further away from the spine almecdate little by little and in triangulating, and I cauterize away the two bones; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling on the face, then the face has a great cauterization on the stomach, as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse at all cauterize clave; and leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal until it is well.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnage that is called "thelulum
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you begin to cut the carnage (the tissue), if it is hot, warm the cauldron and then dip it into the carnage that has been cut; and leave it until the wound has healed, from which there is no pain; do this once or twice, and if there is any carnage left, cauterize it as we have said; after the beneficial remedies, take care that they heal until they are well; and if you cauterize with a large cauldron on the flesh, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound that has not been treated properly
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear a wound that is torn or opened, which we will describe in its place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no blood flow, and it is inflamed and covered with pus and corruption, then you must prove it with the entire subtle tent, and be careful that you know exactly how much of it is perfect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restarting the cautery as many times as the corrupted and inflamed part is burned, one or three times according to the quantity of the needed treatment; and beware of the large veins which are involved, and the openings of the nerves.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula runs into the belly and intestine, beware of these veins, and do not make an incision except in the flesh, and believe that it is not persistent; after healing that part as long as it is healthy, and if the matter is dried up, know that the part is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, know that the part is three times corrupted, and the bone is rotted at the root; and thus as one of these things which we will explain in their places.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys comes with great wind and does not respond to the treatment of women, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from one side to the other at the clavicle cautery which we have just mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and greater aid will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a cautery in the back part of the bladder, where the hair of the penis comes into contact with it, and one on each side, and each as long as a fingernail; and you make another cautery behind, where there is need; and you make the cauterization clavicle according to the shape mentioned above.
de la marris	from the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and does not allow itself to be conceived, and the flowers are corrupted and delayed in their term; and when they come, so they feel great pain: then it is necessary that he make three cauters around the bud, as we have said in the cauter of the bladder, and two cauters behind the back; and let the cauters be pegged, as we have said.
de la hainche	When the haunch is cold and moist, and does not allow itself to be conceived, and the flowers are corrupted and delayed in their term; and when they come, so they feel great pain: then it is necessary that he make three cauters around the bud, as we have said in the cauter of the bladder, and two cauters behind the back; and let the cauters be pegged, as we have said.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip bone-socket, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is farther away than the other when they are measured together; and the joints are found to be loose in the department, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip bone-socket at I cauterize resembling a circle, and sign before the joint around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and if it is, let the cauters be such as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have this fire cautery, make three cauterizations with the olive oil, and let the cauterizations be perfect like all the rest; and heal until he is well.
de la dolor de la hainche	for pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with large pills of foul-smelling pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards, make the cauterization; and the method of the cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, together with fiery medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is according to many methods, of which one is: that you cauterize on top of the hip three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and make it deep and wide, and there between each cauterization leave a space the size of two, and let the olive oil cauterization; never do a cauterization in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, whether the cautery is made with a ring that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the flesh of the kneecap is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it is done in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain comes up to the thigh and leg, then two cauterizations are made below where the patient feels the pain, and one cauterization above the ankle three times; either as a knife-cut cauterization or burning the flesh of the shin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or three on the foot or near the arch, then cauterize at those two or three places on the foot called "toes".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if his craft is, let him do it more; and if he feels that the pain is from the knee to the thigh, let him make a fire cautery with a knife or a circle, and you give him good guard in all your cauteries so that he does not leave them out as much as the cautery burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who made a fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and left them so much that the leg was all wrinkled, and the bones too, and it was pierced and corrupted all the bones.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a remedy for the belly that killed him.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if his pain is in two parts together, make fire cautery in one and the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, from which this is the way, make one iron big and thick as an onion peapod, or a little less, and space between them the quantity of a pea pod; and let the intertrunks be on both sides, and also like peas, and I have many well-made irons; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and hot, and then put it on the boot of the sore leg, and let it turn round the back of the thigh; and let it be cauterized once more, and leave it for three days; and then make a poultice of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of the injury until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Al-Buqaqum says that we should use little of this cautery because of the danger of scalds, and few people use it; but this is a good cautery, which can bear it, and let him where it burns.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical cautery of burning should be made like this: between the margin of the wound and a wall or a panel of wood, with a height of two hands, and with a thickness of two inches; it should be opened from side to side, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After put on the chest of the horse, let the patient lie on his back next to his side; and put your hand much above on the chest of the horse; after get between the two circles of hot awl that are heated in the fire a poc, and leave it an hour ten, and suffer the patient the heat and pain.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it will prove the same as fire; and when the medication has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and raise the horse's leg of soft awl, and leave it for three days, and put on wax as much as the black scorching is healed; and let him rest for three days until it heals; and that one who follows behind will help after the cure of ointments as long as he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, make the awl burn according to what you have done in the hainche gradually; and this is the way of hot awl, and I have written it where the medicine is rectifiered.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Get alkali and live chalk, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take some small slots in which the tip of a risc can enter; and place that pot on top of another pot that is well sealed, and pour alkali and live chalk and sweet water into it, so much as to cover the two powders with it; and leave it like this until it has passed through it twice with water and see where the pot is sealed; then take all the water out and pour it over the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it is well water and is amenable to the work of medicine and other cauterizations; Because it performs such a work as fire, and if it has other medicines, all of which are mixed together with soap, all of these things.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galliens tells us of a remedy where one man was cured of the pain in his thigh and sciatic nerve, and he had great heat, and he said that no other remedy was made, and that he was healed on one soul when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you squeeze the green and fresh chalkstone well and dry it, and grind it with a little fat, and put it on the thigh and the leg and the hip where the pain is, and leave it; and let it be for III hours and because of the quantity so that the sick person does not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he makes him enter or bath until his body is a little bit heated, and he makes him enter the bed, and the pain will go away all of it and will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicine unless after the evacuation of scar tissue.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyscolores says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it helps a lot; and the cautery must be done in some way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and burn it with oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb and the other one called phalange.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After take a goat's horn dry, and hold it in the fire until it is coals, and lay it on the wool, and leave it until it is cold; and do this again, and never stop doing this as long as you think that it comes to the hip, and the pain stops; and this way of cauterizing is called "goat' horn cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of two pains
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by sitting down or by impact or by too much evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold matter, there is no remedy for these appearances except that those who come from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that the patient voids himself of foul pills or other appearances, that one make on his back where the pain is, three lines signed with a cross, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cauterization be made according to the cauterization called 'pin'; and if you see, make III cauterizations or IV according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have constricted spine when they stand up and fear; and you find in the back upper spine and the appearance that comes on the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you treat him, if you cauterize with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cauterizes each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize inside the spine with a fire that is two or three lines long, and let the wounds be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After you have treated the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply fire in places where there are nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When there is pain in the joints due to moisture that spreads to each limb, and when pain occurs in parts, what is called "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it is cured with fire in this way: make the fire cauterize around the joint of the foot, and let the fire be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you grasp on the face of the foot, then perform cauterization with all the cauterizations that are claimed to be "none".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up to the genitals and to other joints, and this happens many times, then perform cauterization on each knee with three cauterizations or four of each part, with olive cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but only hold your hand firm for as long as the flesh of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains come down to the genitals and to the back, then administer the cauterization that we have spoken about in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then perform a pinch of the fire twice; and if there is still pain in the two joints of the fingers, then perform a pinch on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this good governance, and you purge phlegm, then will you be healed by God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the balls descend into the bowels and it is newly, then it is that when you see him cured, he does not vomit any more that day; and he uses things that make his belly light, so that the end descends from his belly; after he sits down on his back between your hands, and he orders him to wash his hair as long as the balls are repaired, and he takes them with your hands, and signs an inch above the rupture on the bone of the hand, and there is a sign that is like half a circle over the heart; then heat the fire
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it drops senteles.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then return the balls to their place; and let the minister dry his hand so that it does not turn back; and work well the legs of the sick person, and put a cuff on him I and I serjant on the legs, and another one on his foot which dries his hands; then put the fire cautery on your sign all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you touch the bone, and if you do not touch it the first time, then start again another time until you reach the bone; and take care carefully that the ball does not slip when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and so that by this fire the sick person does not die, or another bad.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the fire cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and of adults also great according to their measure; after III days cure his place of the cautery of butter until the warming is done; after the cure other oilings until he is well, and lay the sick person on his back for XL days until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that his medications be taken long enough, so that the ball does not slide when he prays to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is brought to him and kept for another forty days; and good rest, that he work little and beware of too much drinking and eating, and too loud shouting; and when he has done this teaching, let him be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here the cure of cutting in his ointment.
de la routure dou ventre	of a rupture from the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, do the cautery of cautery according to its quantity, and let him have third of the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancient ones said that one should cauterize at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the place of the incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another further back, and all your hand around all the cauterized place.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is gentler and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, or from a sprain or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the cure with medicine does not help, then it is appropriate that he be cauterized at the fire which is called "poins", and the cauterization is according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from torments and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is well after the first cauterization, it is good; but if not, begin another cauterization on top of that one, for the custom is that fire must be applied to the member that is nearest to him so that you should make the cauterizations as long as the patient remains ill.
de meselerie	of confusion
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The pains are helped by no heat but much aid, and most of the disease comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Do not see the cautery, but beware that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division of diseases, and does not cause pain or delay, and you doubt that corruption will permeate the whole malady, then make five cauterizations on the top of the head: I cut off the hair from the top, and the other towards the front at the end of the hair; and one behind on the nape; and I leave it so that the cauterization comes to the bone, and so long as the scabs come out without it, so that the vapors of the heavy humors can come out; and the cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if his digestion is scattered everywhere; and it loses manifestly, so that you must have the fire cauterized by these cauterizations that we have said at the beginning, and one cauterization in his neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great cauterization on the head and another deliciously, and two on the shoulders; and two on the kidneys, and two on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I make cauterizations, the more help it gives, and the more benefit it brings; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cauterization as the healthy person does, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, leave the face of flour with honey and other cures as long as it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healthy, then make the cauterization on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little bit entered into the flesh of the cure; and then cure with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is done cauterization and by hand and at the foot and at the back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and so if it is osteized; and nevertheless it does not interfere with him unless he knows the members and outlets of the moving heart.
de albaras	of albars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albars" is awake, and the medicine has no effect, then cauterize with a perfect fire, according to the quantity of the remedy, until the blush is taken away, and its color changed; then cure with flour of beans and lentils with oil of roses and plantain leaves, and blood of cabbage and almond, each in part; and mix them all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for leprosy by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leper begins to appear, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize with a fire that seems like a circle, surrounding the entire area of the leper.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet some say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the leper's wound; and yet I do not think this is good, because it might cause it to become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never heard of this being done with any success; and rather, it is better to cauterize all around, with the fire called "a circle", as we have said in many cases of cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some people have a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die or because of the excess blood that it produces or because the patient is very old and has little blood, or because they are very young; then you will see them hurry to die: so cauterize them with small fire in piercing; then leave them like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce her with all the cauterizing, let the fire of the cauterizing be hot:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterizing has pierced the blood, and let there be such cauterizes that the patient feels cold in some way so that the course of the pus is stopped.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, as long as he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease, which is called "corrodens," is not anything other than a putrefaction of the member, for it mangles the members just as fire dries up the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in its early stages, which can be treated with fire, then heat the claves carefully, small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after cauterizing all sides, so that you completely remove the corruption, and nothing remains of it, that everything that is corrupted is taken away by osteid.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the burned members oil to soften them as much as the burnings of fire are healed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of the causes of pain with garlic.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days a scar does not heal, it is good; and if it does not, begin again the fire cautery on that which is delayed from its place corrupt.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment is never cured with medicine for the fire cautery; but the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said above concerning the treatment of the medicine for the wound; take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the onions that come to the edge
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes it happens that after cuts, a disease called "clots" forms according to our intention, and it is a large faulty thing that bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the fire cautery of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say Fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery with fire so that you heat cautery as a feather of a vulture, and it is made of good iron to the measure that it can poke the nail from all sides, and that it has subtle edges; after, place it hot on the nail, and wrap your hand completely around the nail until it comes out at the tip; and leave it like this for III days until it starts to move putridity; then make a poultice of wild marjoram crushed with vinegar, and leave the poultice on all night, and let the nails come out and will be rooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with a poultice of marjoram crushed with vinegar, and leave it on all night, and let the nails come out and will be rooted from their roots. And then cure the wound by covering it with soil until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the neck is twisted by defers, and many times comes and in hand and piez, it is necessary that you bring fire to it; and this is a little way: take a chain of iron or of metal, or a feather of a vulture, and put it on the nail and the althelma, that is to say, porrels warts; and put the chain on so that it turns red all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep path up to the root; and suffer the patient a little the stinging of the hot water an hour; then let him be, and he will be rooted from all his roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Ensi fai an aprés autr, tuntu esrai chi tuzu cös si ston kors, pui li kuri de oignimenz ki engenan chér.
li cure dou trembler	Thus, make another preparation, while you burn all those who are in the core, then cure the odor that causes fever. The cure for trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold, or from quartan fever or other, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, a cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization at the feet, and one above the stomach with olive oil cauterizing; this will stop the shaking, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times do appear on the body by sweating, or pustules that come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is the first time that they appear, then you must make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a delicate cauterization with oak gorse, so that the tip is taken from fire, or with the root of aristeology at a distance, or with the lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And in no way are the cauterizations done at the beginning when it begins, according to this method, and they cannot grow hair before, but the excess is broken off, and they are cured; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great pains of blood from the artery that is cut to the wound, which comes to the surface, or to incising an abscess, or to cauterizing a member, and similar things; it is a most terrible thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case, when you have one, if you are in a hurry to put your index finger on the wound of a vein, and draw it out little by little until your blood stops flowing from the hole that it has made, and then put fire to olive oil, small or large, as much as it is red; then take I, or a great or a small one according to the wound and its place, and hold the cauterizer on this vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cauterizer in place until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you pricked when you lay your two fingers above a vein, and the cauterization has stopped, then take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short of the vein, it cannot be stopped well anyway unless by one of the four ways we have said: or with cauterization, or with extraction if it has not yet been treated, or with a strong thread tied, or with medicines put on which have the power to stop the blood; and let it be bound and stretched carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a strict binding with cloth or place burning things on it, or similar things, if it does not help, then do not do it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Et s'il n'a pas de miroir ni de remède à portée de main, alors il doit placer son index sur la plaie de la veine comme nous l'avons dit, et bien étirer jusqu'à ce qu'il se soit arrêté sur la plaie et la veine; et ne le remuer que s'il est humide d'eau froide souvent car il faut que l'eau soit froide autant que possible jusqu'à ce que le sang soit gelé et épaissi et arrêté; et faire des enfoncements avant celui à qui il faut faire des cautères et des médicaments.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have spoken to you in the first chapter about all diseases in which fire cautery, or burning medicine, and squirts, causes and instruments, and the shapes of cauterizations are needed; and I put this chapter from the top to the bottom, and I will go in this chapter through the middle way for those who suffer more lightly than those who want it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that with this ointment there is more danger and fear than with the first cautery, and for that reason more caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not take any foolish actions.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the ways of people come to cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who because of their disease have died easily due to the foolishness that results from their illness, and from the great severity of their disease, then we should be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these things which you have told me, and said: "Wait, I am getting better"; and the disease is mockery.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right that you should consent to these people who come to you with this manner of speech, but rather place greater confidence in your honor than in your own desire, and do not open widely but carefully from the one of whom you are certain, and from whom you might have taken and lost; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients that health may be converted; and he who will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and may you wish for the divine inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to that which is before or fire cautery, which I have devised from the beginning up to the end, for you to find more easily that of which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Now this child is often afflicted with this disease, and when the baby cries too much the head of the child is restrained too tightly; and it is never said that this is the cause, so let us not say it again.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those whom I have seen it affect have died; and for this reason I believe that we should be more cautious in the treatment of this disease.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose neck was swollen with fluid, and whose head became heavy until it could not be held up; and because of the moisture it seemed that he would die, and this moisture gathered around the spine between the cheek and the bone; and the head, because of this moisture, is swollen and the abscesses are small, so cut a large slit in the head, as far back as possible; and also observe the shape of the spinal column:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, so make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture is soured by the bone and you see the folds of the cheek opening from each side, and when you press it with your hand towards the inside, water does not come out and it does not return to its place: then you should make three incisions on one side of the cheek according to this way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract the moisture all at once.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards, remove the dressings and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then take off the dressing, and treat the wound with ointments and oils, and let the head be dried up equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incision is that you consider where the length of the abscess, and the assembly of the needle; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess length is, and the needle assembly, and do it according to what you can; and beware that you do not seal the artery; and come away with blood, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of healing
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease called "cataract" or "pit", and the disease is old, and the medicine cure does not benefit, then the second cure is to make a cauterization with that which will seal the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is therefore necessary, when you can see them seal, that the patient covers his head; after rubbing the place with an rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's hair from all of it; then inspect where the veins enter, and their locations on either side of the ears, and they are raised; then sign the lines of the cheeks, then cut them both with a sharp scalpel, so that the sawing goes down to the bone, and this is done on both sides.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, close the mouth of the artery and tie the knot above, carving also as I have said across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow continually without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the sense, then you must measure the quantity of the space of III inches, then sign with a needle and cut down to the bone; and what is needed to put blood out so it is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no room for bleeding, if the cut apotomies do not come, then draw the wound and bind, and the cure of the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of shaving
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient toothache comes, and catarrh is acquired, because of the moisture of tears and fever in the temples and old sores and similar things, it is treated with medicines by the ways of medicine remedies and none of them benefit, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair grow in his temples again, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens very well with its beating, and is not too tightly closed except in some people who are too cold; and if it is closed, then the patient removes his collar from some sheets, then he rubs the place with any harsh cloth, and raises the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	puis escorche le cuir légèrement tant que tu viens à l'artère, puis la trais en haut comme pincées, et la dépare bien des toiles que sont désوز li de chescune partie; et s'il l'artère est sottilz, si la tourne à la pointe de l'uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantité des II chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the skin lightly as you come to the artery, then trais it up like pinches, and pare well the webs that are desoz li de chescune partie; and if the artery is sottilz, so turn it to the point of the uncine, then cope that part according to the quantity of II chiés. For if it is not copped, the sans would not be all in all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And trais dou sanc of VI c/ to III; and if the artery is grans, so it is necessary that you tie it in II leus of a double strong thread of silk, which porriture does not i come before the suddenness of the wound, and come decorremens of sanc; then cope the superfluity that is between the II lines at that hour meisme, and then, if you see, so cauterize with the cautery cutellaire jusc’a l’os as long as the chiés are copped; and this is the muedre oevre, if the malaides does not have fievre and he is of a chaude complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is an aid to end moisture; for this is a more great aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the artery with fine cotton and place it on well-made tentures; and when you remove them, use dry medicines that cause the formation of charcoal and tentures, as long as they are healthy; and if without a stop from the artery you cut so much as you can, quickly cover it with cauterization, or employ vitriol on it and strain it in your hand until the clot is hardened; and if you do not have this present, place your finger in cold water for as long as the clot hardens, and remove it as much as it comes off; and that which is wetter and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery cutting from two sides, but let the cutting be well-spaced so that it lasts longer on fire.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two knives a line of space, and then when you have signed off the two legs, and you put on there the fiery iron as long as it comes up to the bone, and cut the vein in two lines; and be distant between the two shoulders because he is not stuck to this fire instrument from all sides; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come out of the veins that are on the top of the head of the shoulder, and there is no benefit from the medicine that I make, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and feel a feverish sensation as if it were cold; and if the oil is soft and moist so that the hair of the eyelids falls, and the eyelids are burnt by the heat of the tears, and they are scorched by the fire of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et let them call the old "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then make III slashes straight across the forehead according to its length; and let one of the slashes be as II days all along the forehead going down until it reaches the nose, and the others II at II costles above the paper, and keep away from cutting the arteries which are above the paper; and keep your hand away from the extension of the II mandibles, and each wound should have III pieces joined together; and put a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe out the blood, then pour the spatulum from both sides where this form is.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Et let them call the old "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then make III slashes straight across the forehead according to its length; and let one of the slashes be as II days all along the forehead going down until it reaches the nose, and the others II at II costles above the paper, and keep away from cutting the arteries which are above the paper; and keep your hand away from the extension of the II mandibles, and each wound should have III pieces joined together; and put a piece of sponge and many cloths to wipe out the blood, then pour the spatulum from both sides where this form is. Des l'incision qui est dever la temple jusc'a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l'os, puis fai autretant des la moiene incision jusc'a l'autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you bottle up in the first cut the instrument that is called "culteller," and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not sharpened, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the edge-biting towards the carriage at the corner, and the edge soft towards the bone, and bottle up until it comes to the moderate cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the chief at the edge as long as the incision is continuous until it opens at the corner, and then the other way around in the moderate cut until the other side; and then remove the blood equally, and press out the blood; then put in each cut a piece of fine cotton cloth, and put on drapings wet with wine and oil and honey, and make sure that the abscesses don't come up; and on the third day take off the bandage, and give him great amounts of water, and then cure it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until he is well.
dou reume des eulz	to remove the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it is necessary to remove hairs by a kind of cauterization, and you see the hairs torn and small, and blinding the eyes, and burning paper; and the hair falls, and when it comes to a head it hurts badly, and the patient sneezes; then know that these matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the cure that is done with them, if this is done correctly, so it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you tell the patient to raise his forehead, then make a deep cut in the forehead, and another across the broad of the nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make an incision up to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves that move when you yawn; and when the bone is exposed, so soak all the blood with a sponge, and then tie it between the two lips of the cut and put cotton there, and wrap it in wet cloths made of wine and oil, and be careful not to pierce an abscess; when the bone comes out, so that you rub the bone until the char starts to come out, then cure it with dry things, which cause the char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of flour from wheat, and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment thereof; and apply the same to these wounds that it may dry all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	for the stopper for the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that chides in the ears is one of the four: or grain, or beast, or stone of small size or similar thing such as iron; or seed, as beans, peas; or flowing thing such as water and other similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it chides in the ear, or any other thing that does not fit into the ear and does not stay there, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, do not distil any drop of violet oil or oil from the seed, but then administer extraction; and when the stirring comes, stop up the nostrils with it, and put bandages or wool inside the ear; and hold the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	A mouth of times comes well by this cure; and if it does not come well, then arrange the extraction with delicate forceps, from which comes this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes well with the forceps, it is good; if not, then arrange extraction with subtle sharp forceps of small double-edged instruments; and if it does not come with these, then make a hole in the ear with an iron awl at the top or opening of the ear, so that the liquid cannot enter with the ear wax; then treat it well, for many times comes well as we have said; and if it does not come well in any way, then take a glug (of liquid) where it hurts, and place some cotton; then press the glug on the stone or whatever, and treat it well.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not come out of all these things that we have said, then you will hurry to split the ear in such a way that it is hot and twitches; and the way of splitting so that you do first save the patient from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then put the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split at the root of the ear into the fat where it hangs; and let the split be as if it were a moon, until you come to the stone, then split the bone according to your strength, and suck it carefully into your mouth; and cure until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is stuck and it swells, then administer extraction; and if he cannot come out, then administer a subtle subcutaneous sputum according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and instruct the incision of this seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract them gently and carefully, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, when you blow in the ear, it is necessary that the patient use a strong cough first, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful on that ear where the fluid is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it does not, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it does not, take several small pieces of wood burning gently and carefully, and put them into the ear from the other side and cut off a small piece from one of them; and do not stop until all the fluid has come out, as we said before about the stone in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	En the extraction of the beast, if it is a small piece, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large piece so that one can feel it, then perform the extraction with forceps; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, then extract them with fine forceps, and if there are none, take the hair to see what the shape is like.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow from the front and wide from above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And squeeze the subtle part of the ear according to the quantity of the pain of the patient, and then suck out the form until all the worms come out. Do this often.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to be extracted, so that it stop inside the cotton string as I said on the stone; and if it does not come out strongly as we have said, so administer distillations that the old ones tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treating of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, whereby here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if silver or gold are distilled in the small openings, and above the worms for distillation; and to press inside the distillation into the instrument of bronze well made so that you can see, and if you take a razor and wrap it with cotton forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines on the string, and let the string be in the ear; then bottle up the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand quickly as much as the oil is distilled or evaporated from the ear; and let the patient smell it inside, and let the distillation be a little heated by the fire so that it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no hearing in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by an ear-pluck, or a stone falling into the ear, and this plucking sometimes comes completely into the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes it comes with little pain, and one can hear well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Such that it comes completely, if one cannot see it, is a severe treatment in many disorders, and in this one can see the patient's ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, then the wound has all this sperm of what it is like:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be in the front and behind all plain, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the operation is a stone or a hook in the ear, so that it has subtle pinholes, and let it bend lightly, until the stone is completely broken.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earache is perfect in the ear, then take a sharp razor blade, and heat it slightly over the fire, and put the end of the blade into the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if you feel the earache that the patient feels a pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear; then put a tent according to its width in the ear, and fill it with Egyptian balm.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do this every day while the wound is still healing, or take a tent and fill it with water rose balm, and sprinkle it with vitriolic powder; and if you see the ear oozing, be careful that you take out the tent and take another tent filled with wax balm that is made of rose oil and wax, until the ointment is exhausted; then cure as long as it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which help to relieve the pain of the ear, which are used or treated by distillation.
de la char des papieres	the paper's pile
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take the roots of a plant and place them on top of the lead vitriol, then crush them with a wooden hammer.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no peeling, then cauterize with the lente-shaped fire cautery, and burn them after incising them; and often repeat this process, until the roots do not peel; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never grow again.
de la gresle	the grease
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Often come in papers some things that look greasy in shape and hardness, and for this disease is called "grandine", and is a mixture of thick moisture in the paper above it; the ovraiges are these: take care so that the grandine does not move from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; then cut off each part easily, then pick it up with pincers, and wrap it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little into the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the split is great, join it with stitches, and heal until it is well; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment will soon restore it and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the split runs from the outside of the ear inward towards the top, turn the paper inside out, and the split will be at a few punctures, and cover and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not harm; and when the split is covered, pour salt water oil, and heal the place where it hurts until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the hair
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is created when the paper is wrinkled on top, and this often happens to young people; it hurts their eyes, and they cannot see the light of the sun, so that their tears come to their eyes; and because they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep in that position, and their wrinkles are wet by the sweat which makes them inflate and change their appearance, as the exinach is opened up into oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press down on your two elbows, and feel the pain between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And when you press down on your two elbows and feel the pain between them. The method for this operation is that the patient should place his head in your lap; and then take a linen towel, and prepare a tent-like structure according to the quantity of pain felt between each part, then put it on him; and press down on his elbows from one side and the other, so that the pain is gathered into the circle; then cut into the middle of the moisture with a sharp tool, making a slit no wider than the wound at the base of the vein; and make the skin smooth in all places until you can feel the pain; and, according to several dispositions, let the pain come out of the slit, according to the form of a piece of fat that is white.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then all the piece of a drap charpit between your two hands at the edge, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it is spread out; and be careful that you do not stir in the tear, so that you do not come to all the spittle until you reach the oil, so that you do not spoil it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the dislocation does not come out at the edge of the tear, so turn it lightly a little bit until it appears; then take it out as we have said, then soak it in warm water and put it back on the place, and draw it from the joints.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put on top to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the apoplexy of heat, let the healer sweat it as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	the hairs of paper
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the sick person's head in your right hand, and then turn the paper of oil with your left hand; if it is changed, it is good; but if not, pour an needle on all the thread above; and whether it is the edge of the hair that grows out of the hairs, and wrap the thread around all the spatulum, cutting a little at a time, until you have reached the large wound up to the small one; then remove the thread, and put the paper over a little bit of cotton and drape, and sign on the paper a figure of an eye, as if it were a Myrtle fruit; and in any case, the figure should be according to the quantity that you can see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si à tiens qui ont mestier c'on coupe grande quantité de la papier selonc ce que li papier est mollié; puis fent à tout le spatule sur les II lignes que tu as signié, et commence des lou grand larmier jusque petit; et soit li une des fendures près des poils naturez en la grossece d'un racine, puis boute l'oncine en l'un des II angles dou ceur, puis l'escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres à une couture d'une aiguille à tout i fil de laine subtil, et essuie le sang, et fai arde la superfluité des fils sur les II sorcières à tout aucunes choses gluans, si tu vois faire ceci; et si ce non, si n'en aies cure, puis laisse la couture et les fils jusque trois jours ou quatre; puis guéris la plaie sens couture de choses séchans et constrignant, car li papier se relèvera au soudement de la plaie et l'assemblage de li, mais li couture est mûre (si com dirent li ancien), et c'est ovraiges sans paor; et si à une autre manière: et est que tu signies la papier d'une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons contéit, à trois oncines désévrez selonc la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then take one who rises with small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the clamps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle or it has I thread, and bottle up the figure; and bottle up another thread with great pain, and the second fil with small pain, and join them equally between your two hands; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin in which you have tied it, as we have told you, then join the II lips of the wound by stitching, and soothe it until it is well; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then apply oil of cerote and similar healing ointments; and never happens that the hair of the paper turns white: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound heals and the paper is lifted, and they can no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute un fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse l’autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a un ou deux ou trois ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et s'il est chassé, il est traité et les poils ne viennent pas avec lui, si tu chasses la chasse au-delà de tout le fil que tu as ordonné, tant que la chasse vient fort d'un trou en haut et que tu la vois par la vision de l'huile; alors si tu chasses la chasse et le fil, et ferme l'huile et laisse-la fermée II ou III jours, tant que les poils s'enracinent dans leur place et naissent le cheveu; et si les poils sont petits, si tu fais un petit fil de cheveux naturels, et les soulèves avec celui-ci ou tu le laisses, tant qu'ils sont étirés et puis les lisses.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or "oil rot," comes in oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes by accident of a wound, or of a scar, or of a cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method for treating this is that you cut off the wounded part, and separate the lips of it, and put thereon a wound-dressing, and keep it there until it has healed; and it is not fitting that you use in its treatment anything that dries and constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, then the disease will come back worse than before; but use soft things, as fenugreek; and water or ale and flax seed be boiled, and an ointment be made with one of the oils, and wrap it up, and treat him with it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment should be that you do not allow it to mend in accordance with its former state; and those remedies that we have said are only to be used once for this disease, should not be applied again, so that it does not return in accordance with its former state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the horse which comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is dislocated, truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental cause comes from wounds and slits and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the aid in him is that you squeeze an awl, so that it has a double thread, and stick it in the shoulder, and let it pierce from the left armpit as far as the right, so that the thread comes into II chies of the shoulder; then are the shoulder up to all the awl, and the cap large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is useful, it is good; if not, take a razor and put it in the slit, and turn the paper, and cut II slits where they touch the paper; and let II chies of the II slits of the II angles of the incision that you have caped, and let one angle be so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as that of a letter which has not "I griesche"; then cut off this shoulder, according to the quantity that its sides are out of place, from what follows the paper, then join the II separate parts, and sew them with a thread of lamb; then let the cure be of what we have said about softening medicines, and of tents, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or suture or cauterization, then you must cut a plain split in the hair of the paper, and according to what is said above; then separate between the II leaves of a tent, as I said; and it should be done that the work corresponds to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master remedies prepare themselves quickly with all their power how to return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is appropriate for the work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	and if the paper sounds out
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when this soudure has come about in some way that the paper above is souded with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor souded with the paper, and lift it up; and hold it against the thin spatumil, which should not be too sharp or too trenchant, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp spatumil that bleeds the oil; and let your incision be, from which you tear the joined together paper, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and all that is joined together is healed, and never uses in sour salt water, and the leach of sweet water, and of colier; then put between the paper and oil a tent of linen, and put wool wet with dew on the oil; and after three days use the collar and things souded as long as it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I understand that the nail comes in two ways: it is nervous and resembles robust healthy skin, and another that is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture, which when touched with a hot iron and rubbed by pinching, cannot stand; and both appearances begin to spread towards the great tear, and grow little by little until they obscure all sight, all light, and all movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is such that the patient places his head in your hand, then he opens the nails; and hold the paper in your hand, then coil the nail with small turns at the tips, and lift it up; then take a needle, and put there a hair of horse, or cow, or bull, and make it strong; and double the point of the needle a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the way through, and tie the nail to a thread and lift it up, and peel off at the root of the nail so that the blood comes out finely and gently along the hair, and leaves the natural tear, so that by incision does not come the flow of blood customarily; and never is the nail tied only once, and on a string, as we have said; then peel off all the thin skin with it.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spit does not touch the raw cloth and tear it, and that the prunella is not pricked; and after the incision put in the oil a little string broied, and of the colier made of litargire, and leaves it until the other day; then he cures him who has to as long as he is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the unclogging cannot enter, this image of the nail with medicines is often cured; and such as I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the oil on the sick person, and take the spit a little lighter according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail slightly, and if you see that it does not thin out and the rawness comes on quickly, so distil from your mouth in the oil of colier made of litargire and of the colier red and string broied, and stop the oil until the other day; then begin again the other work according to this same way, as long as it is all boned.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If any other thing is contrary to you in the oil, as an abscess, then take milk, and first cure the abscess until it is sound, and then resume the work as before until it is sound.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	If the appearance of the flesh around the wound causes great harm in the oil, if it is suspended, and a part of it, not all, so that tears do not come out; then distill into the oil red wine which is made from alizarin.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	the flesh that comes out on the pear
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of certain men a certain flesh that comes out on the pear
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adjust the cure for each weak oil of nature; and of accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member suffers that work.
des voines des eulz	of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Some wounds are red, and when covered with oil, they bear the work and weaken the oil every time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that you look at the first one to see if the oil is good, and if it is not, and there is no other disease than the skin; then the oil in some way: instruct the patient that he put his head in your bowl, then hang those wounds for all their length according to his wisdom, and make the cuts subtle twice according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be made two cuts in one degree according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And then, as you coil up the veins carefully, wash out the blood hour by hour, until you can remove the veined force from the oil; and keep so that you do not scar the oil at the tips of the spatulums, and perform this work before noon when the sun is hot, and be so very careful in your work that you do not damage anything more than the veins; and when you have done this, let it distil into the oil green and red oil to corrode what is delayed from the sebaceous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have no power to coil up all of this in that hour, then make a paste on the oil from things that calm the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured of the abscess being warm, then start again according to this method which is mentioned above as long as it is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	about the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The fistula of the oil: when you cure it with fire cautery and fiery medicine as I have said above, and it is not healed, then split it open at the abscess, leaving all the moisture in place until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then reassemble it with the proper tool so that its shape is restored; it is called an 'aspre chief', and be made smooth from one end to the other, and be ground like a blade:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it back on the bone's corrupt place, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you see that corruption has gone; and make it smooth again, and restore it to the place of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If his leg is well-healed, and the bow has been reset, and the arch of the foot remains intact for at least 40 days, and there is no new abscess or bad accident, then he is well; but if not, except that the fistula should be brought back to the hole in the heel according to this form: and it is necessary that you uncover the bone a second time with an iron saw, and with strong medicines, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron bar has three angles, and that the foot be bent up to the toe so as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If his leg is well-healed, and the bow has been reset, and the arch of the foot remains intact for at least 40 days, and there is no new abscess or bad accident, then he is well; but if not, except that the fistula should be brought back to the hole in the heel according to this form: and it is necessary that you uncover the bone a second time with an iron saw, and with strong medicines, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron bar has three angles, and that the foot be bent up to the toe so as you see here: then put it on the bone of the foot, and keep your hand away from the oil; then turn all back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it in his leg; and then restore the place with dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the char is ready and the leg has hardened, then bring the matter to the foot; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the fluid of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the removal of the fluid from the oil: When the hair has grown long and even, and if it pricks at its base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow. For in the preparation of this oil, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	a break in the woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a disruption comes in the woven fabric, then it opens up, and comes out like paper grains so that one can see it; therefore, if you cover it with a cloth, the weft is such that you push an needle into the root of the part from below up to there, then push another needle where it has double thread from the part of the weaver; and let that pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement; then cover the double thread and wrap one part of the woven fabric around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put it on oil in abundance of balm; and let it be until the thread vibrates with the woven fabric, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never is the wound restricted by the woven fabric each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have reached a certain length, let him pierce them with a thin stilet used to inject oil, and draw out the moisture and cut the hairs, and remove them all at once; then extract them until they are well.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but a bow that is put together in oil, resembling water flowing down, and is not actually water; and the manner of its appearance in the ovary is such that you sit the patient on a padded chair and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it as much as you see the bow come up to your hair; then pull it off completely, and do not cut and strip the light, and observe the hairs as if they were alone; and if they do not shed, know that it is water, and the shedding of the bow's light is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you place the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatula and strike on the Horny membrane with the continuation of the connective tissue with the horny membrane and the crown, until it bleeds; and when it has bled, if it is distilled in hot honeyed water or in cold water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be treated with other treatments until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	the water of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of arrows in the split, and what is necessary to pierce it; if you work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands, far from sunlight, and press the oil firmly; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then put the tip of the instrument at the root of the crown by its thickness to a point in that blubber of oil at the part of the smaller tear, and bottle the instrument called "almagda" well, and turn your hand around until it breaks into the blubber of oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and the measurement of the way of almagda should be at the perfect measurement of the space that is from the plum-pudding up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the horny membrane, and then put the instrument at the level of the water, and express a path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is sitting now, then look at the patient before you and the instrument in your hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a short while, and then take the second vein again with force using the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and does not move, very lightly twist your hand back and forth; and then put some of the liquid into it gradually, and let go of that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then add from afar the oil or some other liquid into the instrument and in abundance of oil-water, and mix with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are in our company, let us put on a thin coat with abundance of water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the magot cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, for there are many men who have very hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", so that this is its form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so then take the joint apart, and don't overdo it, but make it slim, then pour in the oil, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the bed coming, since he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and let him be stationary from all movement, and eat light foods, and do not move his head to the right or to the left, and tie him up according to his disposition until the third day; then undress him in that same very dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then release him from the bondage until the seventh day; and it is only fitting that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is fitting that you tie him up, for he will run away quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	For the abscesses of the cheek, let you put oil before the seventh day, and apply it with the one who soothes an abscess; and when it is calmed down, if you take away the veil and place it on its face with an edge, so that it may cover any day, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then go out of the house little by little, and turn away from it; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Jacob (Israel), who told us that in his country there is such a thing as onomagdal which sucks water, but I have never seen it myself in our country, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancient ones; and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the appearances of the forms of onomagdal, so that he who knows them not may see them; and let them be of iron properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this middle subtility, and the rear in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	from the fire on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No time are born or arise various chards of which it seems scorpions at mouth of foot; and if there are such or he has a char enchantment of good color, and if a char breath of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chards which is breath, and not enchanted, it is necessary that you set the patient between your hands towards the sun; and operate his nostrils, and pour the essence of this middle subtility on those chards, and the trayms hard; for so much as you can bear in a spatumile subtle acute from one part, as you know that this char is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if you open all the subtile light tools gently, so that nothing remains; and if he does not rise again, or abscess, as it should; and if these are malevolent abscesses, then hurry and cauterize as much as possible until this one is stained and all the chards are bone, then pour or pour easily and acutely where wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If it is hot, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is sane; and if moisture perforates as it should, know that there is no carriage in the bone above, whereby the instrument does not come to cut: then you must put a thin thread of linen, and tie it with our hands between each knot of space or less; and put the patient's chin on the thread at his strength, and pull it while smelling until it comes by the nose into the mouth; and many times do this for the child to school, and this is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and feel one after another while making us who are tied thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it so that as long as you know the new have corrupted this chapter, then treat the patient, wash the blood, and dip the cloth in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the wound immediately; make it so three or more days, as long as the oil corrupts all those who are delayed from the wound; and then place a cane of lead for some days until he is healthy, and if there is a need for dry medicine, use it; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, because oil and medicines are distilled in the ear.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and take it with you; and if you see, make a closed cane, and be the instrument flat to purify the head; and I always have in the head for holding when they heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the horse of the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Several times the neck of the horse has a disease called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it is visible to the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and the bone completely, then apply fire or burning medicine; and if you delay to do it until it is very large, if it is hard, of dark color, poor in feeling: but don't touch it with iron because it is a contaminated wound, for when you do it once, much evil comes to the patient; and the wound is of gentle touching, not of dark color, and you see that he can completely cover it, if he voids the patient and covers it without fear, and cure the place with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	Quant li neis est copez et cosus
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	That is, when the solution of continued disease comes in one of these cartilage joints, it is of little profit, except that in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So if it is in any one of these joints, let him not hurry, since the wound is fresh to all its blood; and then fasten the two lips together with a stitch, then cure as long as it is healthy; and if the lips are torn on one side or the other, let them be scalded from both sides as long as they heal, then join the two lips together with a stitch, and bind, and powder over the powder of dragon's blood, and incense bruised; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of great strength or another plaster constantly, and let it remain until it oozes by itself, then cure with ointment as long as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to sew: you either use needles as we have said in sewing the belly; or thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, the fingers cause a hard, grainy-looking abscess to form in each lip; then you should cut each one open and pick out the contents with tweezers, and apply vitriolic brooches to each one according to their size, until the sore is healed; and then let it air out, and treat the dry parts until they are well.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the tooth root causes a swollen gum that the old people call "albulus"; if it is necessary, you hold it with tweezers and cut off the tip at its root, and then apply vitriolic brooches or other binding and drying powders; and if this swelling comes back after the incision, and many times it does, if you cover it again, and cauterize it: if it does not come back after cauterization, and this is the way to cover it.
des sordens	of the orders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	of the orders
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth from pain that you wait to draw out as much as you can, because there should be no excuse for not drawing it out. For this substance is very high until then such that one cannot find an excuse for not drawing it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So when the patient is painful to be drawn, then you must be sure of the teeth that grind.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient is gone, and he believes that his tooth is good, and makes him grind the good tooth; however, this does not relieve the pain until he is drawn out, for we have already tried to do this with these elders; and when you are sure of the grinding tooth, so it is worth you scratch the tooth at all with a sharp file; then let him move your two or small pliers on the first hole and hole as much as it is well loosened, then he securely locks the pliers; and let the head of the patient in your lap, and hold it firmly so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After the tooth is correctly extracted without breaking it, and if it does not move anymore, then take any of these instruments and pour it inside each part lightly, and shake it so as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if his jaw is tight and swollen, you should fill it with tow, where the gaps are; and if he is held gently with pliers so that it does not break when pulled out; and it is necessary to clean thoroughly around the gums to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And do not break it, and there remains a part of it, and returns to the patient by the mischief of the root, causing greater pain than the first one did.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And guard yourself from doing this in the same way as that foolish surgeon does, who often breaks the jaw by his haste and audacity, and never does what we have described; but he brings it about sometimes by the burning of that great disease for the roots, or by the breaking of the jaw, as we have often seen; and when the jaw is drawn out, if you wash the place with wine or aqua vitriolis and twine, and take care not to draw it out suddenly, so that it may not come about that often happens, that it often comes about, if you employ the place of vitriol. And if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, so that they do not mute the teeth first, are long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of strong members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and have teeth to hold them in place.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root moves when pulling, it is necessary to put cotton damp with oil or butter in the hole.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the roots are soft, for then the pliers called 'algefri' are inserted, which makes the jaw look like a beak; and be inside made as a file and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then it is necessary to uncover the whole tooth around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is to say a file, this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be large and strong so that it does not break, and the root jumps out because of it, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the tools, from which the forms come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you help yourself with this instrument that has two heads, from which this form comes:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front of the density of the teeth, and this instrument that seems a pair of large pliers, from which this form comes:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument is good that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not worth counting; and the master subtil chooses his own instrument according to what his work and the disease demonstrate to him, because there are many diseases where the old teacher does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the carriage or other bones, on which it will lie, if he seeks the instruments that are appropriate to it, I have told you, and helps himself with gestures, from which this form comes:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-fitting to hold the bone in place, so that it does not escape but can be held and cut off; and then return it to its proper place with medicine suited for this, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, so make a hole with all this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not seem to fit the natural shape of the jaw, and their form is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the roots are inside after the tooth, and they are not in their right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then file; and if it is rooted with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape I will show you, which is like a small claw, and is made of iron, made in one piece:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits and fits tight to the tooth's hardness, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then file with a sharp file like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the lime where we make needles; and in lime the tooth pokes and pokes in the hands gently every day so that it does not move until it chokes; then the plane at the end to any razor, and the dense is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to grind the sharpness as long as it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the teeth loosen, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on what he chews without choking, and you have cured them with restrictory medicines, and that does not work; if you are to restrain it with a gold wire, because silver wire becomes green and rusts, but gold wire never moves; and make sure the wire is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you notice any gaps between the teeth, take the wire and wrap it double between two healthy teeth, then place the chiés between the teeth, if there are one or more, until you have cleanly covered up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start to cover again up to the part where you started, and tighten your hand gently and carefully until it no longer moves; and make sure that your ligature is at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the heads of the wires to a set of pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth and place them so that they do not damage the tongue; and then leave them as tight as possible, and if they fall out or the wire comes off, tighten it with another wire; if it is delayed and will serve thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the attachment of the healthy II teeth and the II molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then, when the tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and patient should do this, and never make the shape of a tooth of an oak, and put it back in its place where it fell out, and tighten it as we have said, and delay and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	for a cold
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	for a cold
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	and if the fever comes on, then put vinegar on the burn; and if it doesn't go away, then cauterize it with the caustic, which is good for that; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see a red or black or hard spot that the patient doesn't feel or touch, because it is a boil; and if it is turning yellow and there is moisture, then pour the caustic, and make a fine fent with a sharp razor, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if he is not better after your treatment, then put vinegar on it broiling until it has scarred, and then return to your treatment until you have done all; then lift up the leech of air and salt, and treat him with other treatments until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	of the throat abscesses which are called "godath", and they are properly called "amandres"; and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they do not heal, take care: if it is a hard abscess of little size and white color, don't touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is thick, don't touch it with iron either for fear of bleeding; but let it rest until it has cooled down, and then remove it, for it might burst by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see that the abscess is cool and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be well supported, and he opens the mouth and puts his fingers between his teeth, and presses the tongue against all the instrument, so that it takes shape; and it should be silver or gold as fine as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And see the anus, then take the knife and put it into the anus, and go up further than you can; and don't put anything in with it, but rather wrap the instrument in a cloth, so that it looks like a bunch of wires; and yet the head is bent, and one side above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or some other metal.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument, take a cloth and tie it like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be careful not to cut too deep on one side or the other; and when you have wrapped one of the anuses, do the same with the other according to this same way, and afterwards gargle the patient with hot water, and do it often, and let him not get sick, if he gurgles with water cooked apples or leaves of mirthe, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then care for him until he is well; and never cut other abscesses in the throat than the two anuses, if you cut them carefully as those.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I had a woman with an abscess in her throat, which was small; and I closed the whole throat very tightly so that the woman could not breathe through the canal which was constricted, and she could not eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for one more day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had risen twice its size through the two openings from which it had emerged.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I hastened, and inserted a hook in one of the openings, then lifted it high, and pulled hard, and extracted a long piece of bow; then refitted another hook in the other opening from which it had emerged, and pressed her tongue; then I inserted the hook into the abscess, and filled some of it, and there came out only a little drop of blood; so the canal in the woman's throat was completely blocked, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting the abscess for a long time; and the abscess receded, and filled the space that I had previously emptied, until it grew very large again; so I tied it up and cauterized it inside her throat: so it stopped growing; and I left those parts behind, and God did the rest afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the rectum comes out of its place and is far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is big and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscess is soft, and thin, so you should cut it; and that which is round and assembled and is not far away; and it is bloody or of pale color or black, then you should avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the eye.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its blink and its distance, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue on the instrument which we have mentioned above; then insert the awl into the eye, and twist it, and cut with the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; because if you cover more, it will grieve the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two testicles, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use fire cautery on the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in your lap, and then press the tongue of the instrument that we have said or fire cautery onto it, and conflagrate with sharp fire, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using this instrument's motion, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let there be a hair or thread where the medicine is put, as if it were a spoonful of medicine, and hold the instrument to all the medicine on the uvula; and let the patient lie gazing on his back, so that saliva and spittle run out of his mouth from the medicine, lest it go down his throat, and burn him; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the uvula, the quantity of a half hour, until you see it become dark and the medicine taste sweet; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton over the root, until the cotton dries; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and after three or four days clean out what is inside of the medicine; and be arrosezed with cold water, and cure with gargles as long as he is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, save for the cauterization. If it is cured with fumigation according to this method, take calamus and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all into a pot or some of them; and I put it there easily, and make it boil; and the pot shall be well covered with a lid, and the instrument chewed up according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It shall be of silver or of gold, and let one of the shoulders be boiled in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises up the vein by the cannula, until the vein is dead; afterwards you may begin again frequently, until the vein dries out, and be careful not to make it hot at the beginning of the advent of an abscess, for many things can happen; and do not make it hot except at the decline of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog and put a nail in the patient's mouth so that it does not get too hot; for the nail does not make the breath very hot, and this is good treatment together, healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Several times it rises in the throat, a bone or a fish, or nothing; so that you must take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and if what is not opened up for you and is put back in the throat, it is good that you make the patient vomit in such a way that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this thing is thrown up by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of bread dried up; and you tie the sponge to it, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, if it rises strongly, and then pull hard; and if it does not come up with what we have said, then take the instrument of pluck according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can more easily enter the throat, and has the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of it come off, nor does it push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, for whatever it is moving or rustling; if it swallows it, or it draws it out evenly, as far as it can go.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no medicine for this blood, as I said in the division, by means of medication; and when it does not benefit, then look at the patient's tongue to the sun, so that you press it against the instrument which I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, if you draw it out with a small hook, or with delicate hooks that are worth anything.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that doesn't work, take a dog's teeth, and put them in the throat of the sick person, then pour or blow on the dog's teeth until they burn, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is losing their hair all over their body every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, so that it doesn't choke, and move it into his hand often; and if soon as he feels the water, spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if he doesn't spit as we have said, then smoke the sick person with ashafetida, using the instrument that I mentioned in the smoke treatment for the uvula; do this many times, because it won't cause a dry mouth.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of smoke treatment is as follows: you should squeeze the charcoal in a pot where it can fall into the middle, and put the instrument's tip in that place; then pour your smoking substance, and let the sick person put the end of the cane in their mouth and close their mouth, so that the smoke doesn' t come out, but goes directly to the uvula; and the uvula will start to burn now, and if it doesn' t spit, then start the treatment again many times; and make the patient thirsty, and give them salty things and ale, and don't let them drink water; and then the doctor should see what is happening with this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument appears as if it were claws bent for entering the throat; and has a resemblance to a hook, and is sharp like limestone so that whoever takes hold of it cannot let go; and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the instruments of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Mouths of شبیهy to an abscess are, according to what the memory comes here before and after in this book, and they are diver en perforation et en taille; et c'est en II manieres dont l'une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu'il tient moistor.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second manner is so that they are for the joints where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess at the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the charnuted part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if to abscesses it is not necessary to pierce, as long as the bowels are dying according to their completion; and if to such that it is necessary to pierce when they are cured, and do not die according to their completion, as to an abscess that are delicate joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from delicate joints, and it is left as long as it is putrefied inside, for fear that the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contracture in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is from the principal limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is putrefied, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is from the foundation, if you pierce it thus while it is cured without digestion complete, so that the one which is from the foundation does not putrefy completely, and be stretched inwards, and comes to a fistula; and cannot heal thoroughly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforating the abscess which is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the argument and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation where it depends most on the abscess, and at the place where it opens; and let the perforation be long of the body, and the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and in the nigh parts and in the arteries, and in all its even parts where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, by that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in the charnute place, if it moves so that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce him in front, if you draw out his blood from within, and it is full of dirty water; and perhaps his lips become hard and his breath becomes difficult.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess that is pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limbs require.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should bring small abscesses to a head, small pustules, and with large abscesses, large pustules, and many splits according to the appearance of their size; and if there are such abscesses that have come to a head and have healed over, so that they look like patches of skin, and if they are large, so that they are torn open again; and if there are such abscesses that are split into three angles, and if there are such that are split in half, as with an abscess on the back; and if there are such that are split lengthwise, and other shapes that seem to have been cut.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the hopes of treachery do not ever jump with the issue of the bow, lest the patient die, and you don't notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this medicine with great care, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound is small, then apply a linen or old cotton bandage; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then tie each one so that they come together; and if you have wrapped part of the skin in a cloth, and have sewed it up, then fill it with dry cotton or a drenched linseed poultice, and leave it like that for three days; then open it up, and treat the bone with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood from the wound runs into your face, then bring cold water and rinse it quickly, and moisten the cloth, and put it on the running place again and again.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood from the wound persists, then bring a remedy and treatment, and the powders that I have said to hand in this book, and if it is a wound of the nose or mouth, and the aposteme or the hole is very nervous, then know that you should put on top bedsheets and drapes soaked with wine and oil and warm; and if it is gangrenous, and the leg is fleshy, then know that you should soak the drapes in water and oil or cold wine for three days, as we have said; and then clean out the aposteme and wash it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: however I told you before how one should go about treating abscesses, and here is the ointment.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	How to treat small sores, and they are handled by us in the manner of a net, also like the joint of a tree, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are fat and soft ones where there is moisture as well as dry ones; and some are hard and bony at the edge, and there is no doubt that the artery does not work contrary to it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you experiment with all the instrument called "entremessoire", from which the form comes out later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and this comes out by itself.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, if it shrivels up nothing leaving the peel which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when it is left nothing; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and seel, and employ the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the cotton has finished draining, on the second day and the wax, as long as you know that it does not remain night; then treat the wound with ointment for what is appropriate, as long as it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds only a little fat, if the cup follows this form, long; and pour your oils, and peel off all, and put all your treatment to draw the meat away from the skin; and if the artery makes contrary, do what I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And so you will do to the abscess if it is painful, and with the chisel and with the cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the painful abscess and on the wet one, for it is lighter, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or chisel or have no moisture, and the same kind of abscess that I hit with a chisel on the back of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a heavy stone, sharp and white, and couldn't break it; and if we had hit any of them, we would also have caused a wound as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come out of the cheeks, those that come from the children and from the roots of the ears, let the opening be all the way up to the most dependent place so that the bow can come out; and cure them as they should.
des scrophules	of the sores
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there comes an abscess to the throat, and it seeps, and it puts forth ulcers, and never comes to another place or to the cors, and are rotten, and are infected one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each sore is properly within its rib, as the nose and the abscess at the base of the skull, as we have said before; and the appearances of these sores are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in those that are of good disposition for the neck, and seem like the color of the flesh, and do not move from any part, nor is it deep; so you must cut it from above, and scrape each part, and these two lips of the mouth with one finger, if you need to, as we have said before in the case of an abscess at the base of the skull; and little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor is it too deep, so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery and it does not let you work, put in the wound vitriol broach, or some powders that stop blood, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has calmed, if you return to your work, as long as you do it; then feel with your index finger whether there are any small scars, if so, cut and clean them up.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a great vein at the root of the scrofula, it only comes that you cut this scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with old cloth dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have gathered all the scrofula, then you must gather the two lips of the wound and sew them together immediately, so that there is no delay due to the abundance of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary for you to go to the root and draw it out strongly, and to sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce them so that they die; and pierce them in the same way as that which has been mentioned before, depending on it, then apply oil with care and similar things, so that they do not corrupt those who are delayed from corruption; and when the wound is well washed, then treat it with oil, applying it so that he may be healed.
de squinance	from scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones said and spoke about the swelling of the throat; but I have never seen it happen in our land, and it is the scriptural word of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the slit in the throat, which is called the epiglottis, be removed; and for this no help should be sought from anyone, since all the veins and the pharynx of the sick person are at the back of the mouth or throat or two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the throat channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the obstruction which comes from strangulation does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we should cut it with three or four small slits across the back, between two circles or by the amount of the slit in the flesh, not in the cartilage; and if this is possible for cutting the epiglottis so that there is no need for a knife, and the blade is long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, then let him stretch the skin of the throat to its limit, and split the flesh as far as it comes to the larynx; and avoid any blood vessels, for you will see none, and then cut the syphyl, as we have said; and demonstrate by the section of the larynx's blood vessel that bursts at the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed when one doubts strangulation, join the two lips of the wound together, and let the flesh all around touch the cartilage; then administer medications that cause swelling, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: "Do not do this as long as the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault lies with him.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then tie on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death; and to command the senior to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a maiden take a knife and put it in her throat, and she cut some of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had flowed from it, and I saw clearly that it had not been cut open in a vein but rather had flowed out through the throat, and the blood had flowed out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was well; and there was nothing to the damsel but that she was red in color, and returned to her condition; so I said that, in sewing the epiglottis, there was no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	is called a 'hernia of the throat', and is a great abscess in color of a jaundice, and is very common in women; and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or, nature has no disease.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is according to two manners: one seems like a fat man, and the other manner seems like an abscess that comes from us of the artery; and there is fear, and he cannot at all work but in that which is small, and he proves and searches throughout the whole intruder: if you find it also as I know a fat man, and he cannot at all, if he copes, so as we cope them, and treat him to all his head, if there is any; and search well soon, and cure him as it should be, until he is perfectly well.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to do this, of which I will now describe all the similarities; and it is necessary that I say all the difference that there is between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is burning and feverish, as long as the swelling has not passed and is complete; then rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is no heat or fever or pain, and it heals itself, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the skin, and begins also as a speck, and becomes thick; and are according to their appearances, whether gray or moist, and most of the colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of dislocations, it is necessary that you first test and question all the instruments which are called 'entremissoire', according to their shape or the paste which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to examine the abscesses is that you squeeze or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the instrument, and take care not to make a mistake.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running water is short, that it has color, then do so with this one as I said about other abscesses; and if after the instrument does not run, know that it is fat, so do so across, and take it in pincers, and scratch it lightly on each side and guard the bag or where it lies that you draw it out healthy with the nail; and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out by pieces so that nothing stays.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car s'il y a une attente, il revient à nous par plusieurs fois; et s'il en a une petite, et qu'il ne te fâche pas, traite la plaie avec des poudres corrosives douces, extrait la plaie, et met sur elle des choses apaisantes chaude, et le guérit d'autres remèdes tant qu'il soit sain; et si nous le voulons grand, il cout les deux levres de la plaie, et le guérit de celui qui l'a fait.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	If there is a wait, it returns to us several times; and if there is a small one, and he does not bother you, treat the wound with mild corrosive powders, extract the wound, and put on it warming things, and heal him with other remedies as long as he is healthy; and if we want him big, he costs the two lips of the wound, and heals him from that which causes it. And let it be kept for II days or III, until the wound is corrupted, and pour in there vitriolic water; then come back to what was delayed with salt.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s'en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez "albaret", et un qui est apelez "breb", et s'en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aiguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d'arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d'argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	Here is the first sentence of the text: "See here the shapes of the intruding instruments, and they are of three manners: great and middle and small; and there are three quarters that are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and there are also three manners: great, middle, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles from which sorcery is cut, and they are of yellow bronze, or iron, or silver, and they move those who are yellow, and they are more proven of black lead to encircle the corbeures of fistula; and they are of three manners: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromessoires sont les aleines reponues en mainches, si que li malade ne s’en perdroient a l’overture des aphemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu carnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mamelles, et angres, et semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre instrument petit, semblant a escorcies de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estaine sanc:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	The chief of these things to be done are sharp, and of such ones there are who cut not further than on part, from which the skin is stripped so that one may not grip the vein or nerve; and of such intrusive members there are many replied, so that the sick man does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three sizes: great, small, and medium-sized, as you see; and one uses them only in the skin of the foot, as with legs, arms, breasts, and hands, and similar parts; and never does one make another instrument small, resembling strips of blisters, according to this form, so that one stops bleeding:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No one should let the breasts of certain men become corrumped, since they look like breasts of women; and they should remain ugly and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is appropriate according to this form from this line . b. until g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	None should let the breasts of certain men become corrumped, since they look like breasts of women; and they should remain ugly and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is appropriate according to this form from this line .b. until g: then scrape the fat, and employ medicine by burning, then join together the II lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the breast falls down, and is softened by its greatness so that it looks like a woman's breast, if you make it in II ribs on top, by II apparent cracks; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the biggest rib contains the smallest according to this form, from this line .b. until line .g.; then scrape the skin that is between the II lips, and remove the fat, and employ what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not all made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the removal of blood, if it is appropriate that you fill the wound with cotton wetted with an astringent corrosion; and leave it until it drains the remnant and the fat, then cure it as long as it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the hips
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	are caused by hard plaques or ribs which are damp.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels which are in the abscess are empty, if employ cotton wool to cover the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	If the abscess resembles scrofula, if it is cut as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if the wound contains bowels, then apply cauterization as we have described above.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is tight, then often an abscess occurs, and also all the blood goes to the open vein and the abscess; and if you know where the artery is, the abscess will be long; and when you feel it with your finger, you will feel extraction; and if it is for the vein, it will go away gradually; and this is madness to cover up this abscess, and most of all when it comes out of the hips, the thorns, and the neck, and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to remove the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also needs to be removed, and that which is in the swelling of an artery cut from above the skin; then operate on the belly as a snake, and very carefully separate the artery from the threads, until it is uncovered; then put a needle through it, and let it pierce up to the other side, and remove the artery with a double thread in two lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then place the spot between the two knots of an intradoser so that the thread remains there which is there, and the aposteme is freed; then bring the cure as I instructed, until the ligature chokes; then treat what comes with oil, until it is healed; and the aposteme is for the size of a vein, so you should dip your hand in what you can of the aposteme to all the skin, then put the needle through the spot that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, and there is a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the aposteme as I told you, or the ligature of one of the two parts on the two knots of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread has not come out, if he rebounds another needle to all the thread through all the aposteme up to the incision of the first needle, and removes the threads in four lengths; then cut off the aposteme until the surplus comes out, then cut off the surplus of the cure and leave what is tied; then put it on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then bring cures of tents and oils until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the nails of the toes
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As well come they in the artery and in the vein, come they in the nails when they are hurt, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens to the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and that is a grief of nails, and its color seems the color of the heart, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when you tighten them, if the patient feels pain, and they are not perfect in the heart, but mute well from all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in the joints does not come to cover with fire: perhaps it will contract; and that which is at the top of the head or at the front, it makes the skin curl.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the nails are small, if the patient has a nail in his root, and if they are large, if the patient has an onyx, and scorches it, then the bone is broken and the wound is sewn up, and the cura
des grosses boces pendans	the large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There was once in the bellies and nowhere else did it grow, and is a disease called "fungus" by appearance of mold, and is the subtle root, and the large bush; and there were small ones and some very big ones; and I saw one man who had two or three bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were cut open, and ran moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI Z., and the ovraiges in the incision so that you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the articol is white and moist and has a subtle root; so take care with the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pois bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess inflamed, and I will come to the cure of the abscess hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	How long should it be kept wet?
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	As the appearance of the boil comes out by fire cautery or by incision of a pimple, and is on the belly and there are some boils, so as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that comes out of veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind; and if it is by the rupture of the pimple and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when you press it to its two sides so that it turns, and then comes back, and perhaps if it is stuck, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and by great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et si c'est à cause d'humidité, c'est une chose légère, et il faut ouvrir bien quand tu le pressais dans ta main, ne le contraignis point ; et si c'est à cause de sang, ouvres par ces signes l'apothème gros et dur, et est fixez selon une quantité; et si c'est à cause d'un vent qui s'échappe, sache que l'ouverture se fait au touxier, et les ouvertures sont telles que tu regardes l'apparence, c'est pour le sang de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou du vent.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a light thing, and you must open well when you press it in your hand, do not constrain it; and if it's because of blood, open by these signs the large and hard apothema, and fix it according to a quantity; and if it's because of wind that escapes, know that the opening is made at the touxier, and the openings are such that you look at the appearance, it's for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or the wind.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before, for the abscesses, for the artery, and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	For if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, so it is necessary that you command the patient to tie his bowels, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the bowel; then order him to move slowly between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed with all of the bowel, then extend half of the appendix on top of all of the large hook; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a strong silk rope, and let it hang; then operate on the half of the appendix lying on the string, and if you see it caught in the string, let it go; and if you see the bowel, take it to the hook, and deal with the excess; and if the artery or vein is contrary, so go deeply into it, then return to your work and take three needles, and tie them with three threads, and tie the needles around what you have made pierce; then strain the appendix in four places on top of the needles, and if you see anything, remove the needles, and leave the place until it putrefies and dies by itself; or when it is thin and putrid, then treat what needs to be treated, and cut the appendix as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you see, then cure the place of what needs to be cured, and seal the appendix so that it does not open again.
dou chancre	Dou chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Double cancer: We have spoken in the division about the appearance of cancer, and how it should be operated on with medicine, and how it should be avoided to cure it with iron; and we say that cancer is inherited in the breast, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and the old man says that when cancer is in place where it can be cut as cancer is in milk, and in the chest, and in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is in the beginning; and when it is large and old, it should not be approached, for I have never found one who has been cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operation, when it is in place where it can be cut, as we have said, is that you purge the disease of black colic once; then make it well before cutting it; then pour your oncines or cancer, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the place with your hand or with anything, and if the blood runs against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the wound is closed; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	of dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	(II) parts. A point, and whatsoever it is not so deep that it can come up to the intestine when put in, and cannot be cut; then look whether the dropsy is towards the intestines: it is necessary that you cut on the right side of the (III) ribs; and if it is for the liver, cut on the left side of the (III) ribs; and if it is for the bile, cut on the right side, and let not the weak liquid run into it; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and hold your hand to all the spittle between the skin and the instrument as when you are peeling a lemon to the quantity of a thumb or so; then pierce the (III) ribs as much as the spittle comes up to the level of the liquid, and this is the level of the water, then pour it out, and take this instrument, for this is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it looks like a silver dog's tooth, and is made of lightweight bronze or copper, and in the center there is a small hole; and on one side it has two holes, on the other three, and on the other two, and on the other; and the head is cut off as a feather is cut off, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers make with the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top of the head are the limbs, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it is now applied to the instrument; empty then half or a third, because if you empty more than what is appropriate in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he turns away, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick and their pulses mean, then stop the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held now by the measure that stops the hole that is on the medicine, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce in this way; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the sick person suffering this, and hold back the water a little quantity; do not do this every day, and keep yourself from doing it as long as there is no delay but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the disease, and you leave it wet with water, if the cure of earth or sand is warm, and perspiration or bath and in the sun, and turns red by drinking; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	the stopping of sperm
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born with a small foreskin or one that is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it happens that he does not pierce the most subtle skin of all according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put the foreskin of a soft leather on it, and tie and keep it in that way for three or four days, and when it urines, if it does not close it, let it urinate, and then remove it; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is not covered by him.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	And if he is aching, if there is a liquid medicine, as we have said, if it broadens.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hernia in their proper place are blistered, because there is no one born with a hernia at the base of the scrotum, so that they cannot urinate until they lift their scrotum; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter does not come out as far as the testicle, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to treat the hernia is that the patient lies down on his back; then the scrotum and the testicles are drawn up as far as they will go; and if a hernia breaks out in the middle, as it often does, and if it does break out, stop the pain of those who have pain, and cure the wound until he is well.
des pustules de la verge	The pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Several times, a sore comes out in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are good and bad ones; so that you should squeeze them with a sharp hand, and cut them and clean them all up, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on the wound; then cure it with diafinicon until it gets better.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the sore is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, you must apply fire to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the sore is in the penis, and there is part of it inside the skin and part outside, you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it has healed, remove the part that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you heal it all at once, if it is not well secured in the penis so that it does not burst, there will be blackness and corruption in its penis and where the semen comes from; you must cut off all of what is black and corrupted, then put on plaster made of honey and flour, which is made of pomegranate skin and seeds, and cure it with other remedies until it gets better.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the pain comes again, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the pain comes again, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: For the removal of pain and corruption; and if the foreskin is corrupted and withdrawn, so that you can bring a string of lead, and urinate on the patient; and when the hair is shaven from the head of the penis, which has not yet been circumcised, or it is for an ulcer or abscess, then it is necessary to scrape with the scalpel, until the ligaments are loosed, and the foreskin is freed from all sides; and if this is a difficult thing to say, then you should scrape with the spatumulus on the tip of the penis and scrotum; then separate them well, and place a thin linen cloth wetted with cold water, so that it is not shaved again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a wound that continues for a long time like other wounds; however, when we do this operation of our own will and especially on children, it is necessary to do it in the best way and in the lightest manner for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not mention circumcision for their children, since they did not use it in their laws; we have acquired this only through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the most excellent masters and wise men who performed circumcision around the genitals, and with strength, and entirely a novel thing; so it was that he cut off one of them, and by chance he cut off that one above, and held back the other.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	When it is healed over again, and the pain is doubled, and the washing which is from the genitals is not secure at the tip of the member; and by accident the nail escapes the edge, and ruins the work, and often happens that there is no need for washing, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mouthwashing that is done with all the string-like thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the strings are cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you squeeze your hand, if you cut it evenly all along the string; but let the thread be well strung around the leather; and let the manner of the first working be that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not force the string tightly around the penis so much, and then let it rest in all ways that you can; then let it lie between your hands all straight, and re-tie the forces between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then pour your hand into the penis and blow or cup, and raise it up so that the head of the penis is in; then cleanse well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the ring of a double thread, then tie it loose to the other thread; and hold it by the second thread to the pouch and the little finger, and rub between the two threads; then let go of the cup patiently and raise it again, for this is the bleeding; and put powder on top of the powder I dip in a thick paste of boiled egg yolks seasoned with rose water, confited with good oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure with other cures until he is well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for cleansing is as follows: The two shoulders be soft and flexible, and be the same length, even as the hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing is when the cure runs out during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your thumb, so that the leech makes an abscess; and equal it, and if you cannot hold it in your hand, then cut it with shears.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it goes for three days and the part that is sore swells, if you let the abscess dry up and then wipe it lightly; if you can move it as you please, and guard against the part of the verges, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the head of things that have a sore powder, which we have said in the treatment of powders, and if the cure goes beyond measure, and it goes up, it will not harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	dou retenement de l’urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel, or horse's mane, or similar things, which we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not pass, and you see the retention for the stone that is at the neck or the base of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient lie on his knees; and let him be placed on his back, and extend his stomach from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he leans as much as he can; and then it is forced at the base of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine passes; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you bring extraction with all the instrument called a "syringe", which has this form: and let it be of fine lightweight silver, like the feather of an owl; and let the tube be a palm long and a half, and let it be thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urination so that you take a double thread, and bind it to the top with wool or cotton, and bottle the top with the thread inside the syringe; and wipe off the excess of the wool and bottle it up to the top of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit down, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; then put the syringe lightly into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over the bowl; then bottle the syringe up to the bladder, and let the urine come out until the bladder is empty, and make the patient comfortable.
des maladies de la vessie	of the bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When bladder scurvy or rash comes to the bladder, or it is inflamed, and you see there a collection of urine and medicine, so do this to all the instrument which is called "clepsydra", and that is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three parts: II on one part, and I on the other, as you see; and let the head of the tube through which the medicine flows be such that it stops well the stream without addition, so that it can be drained when necessary; and when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the catheter into the moisture, and draw while you go; if you draw the moisture into the catheter, and then rebounce it strongly forward; if the moisture will come in, and come now to the bladder, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one clisters the bladder: it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d'un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n'as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d'oile et de moistor et d'aigue, et le lie en l'estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	from stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the ways of stone in division and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between stone cut into pieces and all signs, and how one must act regarding size; and concerning the bladder and penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stone which is broken in the bladder often happens to children, and this is a sign that the liquid drops from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and I open it here, and massage the patient's penis, and stretch it many times, and then it hardens again; and the foundation is destroyed by many of these stretches; and the recovery is lighter for the children until they are four years old, and it is much heavier in the elderly, and it is easier to cure those who have small stones than those who have large ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with enema, in order to remove all the contents from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never happens that he wants to seek stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and move them towards the anus so that the stone comes out completely from the bladder, and never goes up to the top; then make him sit with his hands apart so that his thighs are spread wide, so that the bladder is all turned downward; then feel it inside and touch it; if you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut over the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not stick when you touch everything, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or use your middle finger, and insert it into his anus; and press down on it, and feel for the stone, and if you feel something at your finger's tip, then moisten your finger again and feel higher up; then push it all the way out, and feel for the stone again, and if you still feel it at your finger's tip, then push it out with your thumb; then take your finger away.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and he commands that he extends his right hand over the testicles, and with his left hand presses the skin which is out of the testicles on the side where the size is made; then he drinks the seed, from which this is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an opening between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side of the navel; and let it be right on the stone, and your two are joined to the fundament, and let the size pass across it so that it is wide at the end, and narrows towards the inside according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; maybe the pressure on that which is at the fundament will be without work; and know that there is a part of the stone where there are angles and margins: such is good for delivery; and if it is a part that is concave, resembling a groove, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grand; et s'elle ne saute, si convenit que tu extranges sur les tenailles qui sont aussi comme une lime au chef, pour muer extranger la pierre si qu'elle n'echappe; ou tu boute desoix li I instrument subtil corbe au chef; et s'tu ne le puis engignier ensi, si eslarge i poc lo pertus, et se li sans decort, si l'extraction de vitriole; et s'il y a plus d'une pierre, si boute premier la plus grand au col de la vessie, puis cope sur, puis le trai fur, et les petites apres s'il en y a plusors.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	A large celi, where there are angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump, so that you extract it with tweezers which are as sharp as a file on the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you squeeze with your fingers, and if you cannot do it like this, so that it is very narrow, and if it is opened without cutting, then extract it with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first extract the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cover it, then push hard, and the smaller ones after, if there are any. And if it is very large, so that it is convenient to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	II things avienen to the patient: or he dieth, or his urine cometh forth straightway by means of that which causes the blood not to be able to be reunited; but nevertheless thou dost strive to draw it, or to strip it from the nails, piece by piece; and when thou hast accomplished thy work, then employ the balm of myrrh and aloe and dragon's blood and bind it, and put it upon a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and red and cold water for the purpose of assuaging the abscess; then untie the patient by his neck, and do not loose the bond until three days are past.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when thou dost untie him, if thou ariseest well his place of oil and water, then dost thou cure with poultices of milk of asses' fat and of oil, until he be well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come to the wound and corrosions, and a cold sensation in the bladder, and if this is held back by urine, which comes in a certain way that it does not pass with the urine: therefore you must put your hands into the wound, and extract the bladder, because if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and spread it; then lift up the wound of water and of mold and of tar, and help it in all ways that you know how to do until it is well; and it is necessary that all the times that you cure it, that you bind the legs together, and put medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is pushed out through the bladder, and is lodged, and the urine cannot come out; if he is cured in this way that I have just described, that you cut him many times, then excuse him from cutting because of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this to myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron and shape it according to this form, and be sure to fix it with three nails in one piece as a stake:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and polish the edge of the stake inside the hole in the stone so that it cannot come out through the vagina; then dip the stake lightly into the edge of the stone, so that it comes out on the other side; and soon the urine will flow, then press your hand onto what is delayed by the stone that is inside the stake.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is so broken that it springs forth with the urine and the patient is in pain, and if you cannot do anything to help it by any means, then I will file the stake over the stone and another on top of it, and insert the stake between the two lines, then pull it forth forcefully, and remove the line, and cleanse the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is well.
de la piere des femmes	of women's bones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	May it happen that a woman's bone is dislocated, and if it ever happens, let there be a great problem, and be guarded by three things: the first is that peradventure the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to remove herself from mirrors, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that peradventure one cannot find a woman who knows how to remove herself from mirrors, even though she is married. And the fourth way is that the woman's bone is more perfectly made than the man's, so that he must make a deeper cut, and there is great fear of it. And if necessary, send for a midwife who is well versed in this art, and at few costs, and if you do not find one, ask no further; I will cast a lot or foundation and seek the bone; and if she finds it, she binds it tight, and recommends that she bottles her wine or water with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she tears, it is necessary that she moves slowly from the entrance of the bladder to the anus, until she arrives at the root of the thigh; then chop on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle where the instrument is placed, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your two feet above the stone or the anus, and cut off the first little; then pour the water into the wound, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as much as the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the similarities so you can determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not go back, put the vitriolic water on it and keep it for an hour until the wound is healed; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have tools that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you with your work; and if it does not go back, and it is the artery that has been chopped, put the powder on the spot and extract the blood and Urine and sweat, and do not try again, and leave the stone and do not extract it, except for fear of death of the patient; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound has subsided, and the blood stops flowing, if you return to your work, then let the stone be far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The water of rose is nothing but gathered moisture or white syrup, which is found in the egg white; and it is called "syf" and never exists properly in the egg's yolk, if one believes that it is another type of egg; and this is the skin of the egg between the white syrup that we have mentioned; and such does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia, if it is because of a weakness that comes to the joints, and that expanded matter is called "syfac".
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from a blow on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color that declines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or water white, and such happens more often; and these are the signs of this assembly, because if it is white syrup as we have said, then the abscesses become painful, a long way away, just like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is caused with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphill, then he feels it bad. So when you know the color of the moisture, try all of the internal quarter, from which its shape is shown here.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the internal quarter, judge who is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat him with fire, it is necessary that the patient be made well according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and puts many sheets over him; then he sits on his left side, and orders the minister that he sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs between the testicles and the long until the hand, and is his cut all straight by cutting the skin of the testicles carefully according to his power; then he takes the spatumile clean, and cuts the skin of the testicles among them until the white syphill, and the scalpel gently according to his power; then he pierces the white syphill with water at a large opening, and drains all the water, and then puts your nails, and raises the syphill upstream; and do not touch the skin of the testicles, but only the syphill; cut it all or piece by piece separately the cost of him subtly, that if you do not cut it well, the water will come back; and if the egg were to jump on your work, take it back to its place when you have finished the work of the syphill; then join the two skin of the testicles with a stitch, then cure him as you would the other wounds until he is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg rotten because of another disease, it is necessary that you hold the strings that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood; then, cut the string from all the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two ramies; then cut the other part as you did the first one evenly, and wash away the blood, and put on the other side wet in oil and water; and put another piece of wool wet in wine and oil, and put it over the two eggs, and put double drapings over it, and tie it up completely according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two drapings, and fill them with wool in the form of what we have said, and assemble them by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and let one of the heads rest on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the grip; and the other two chiefs over the two angles, and let it all be assembled in the loop of the breeches; and no medicine is given to this ramie of cauterization instead of a iron size, but that you apply the cutaneous white that contains the blood with a fine cauterizer, and pierce that cutaneous one time, and scorch it with this small cauterizer:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And pound it in all ways that you can, as much as you can; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move away from the decay of blood, and move away from the cutting of size; and if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess or a decay of blood or another thing, then cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid, and does not wait for this treatment because of its horror, then bring a hole, as I have said, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have spoken that water is there, then place the patient on one side; because perforate the abscess in the part below all the skin, and put the hole long the way of the heart; and make the opening large, so that all the blood runs out; then put cotton on the place, and tie it up, and leave it to run the remaining blood, then cure it as soon as the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the blood to come out of the wound's mouth, then you must put in a feather or an instrument used to draw out the blood from the drops, so that the shape is as before; and widen the wound slightly, and know that the blood returns, and comes together after VI months or so, and when it comes together as before, then the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	For it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the treatment and appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from the testicles, and least often from the ovaries; and this is due to a variety of causes.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say by sour and bitter excess which spreads to the testicles or from impact; and its color depends on the color of the flesh; it does not cause pain and is a grief to the abscess; and perhaps an abscess is grimy and painful, and its color is red, and never comes from an artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if the cause of the abscess is hot and located in the testicles, when you press it with your fingers; it only seems right that you should touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux, et peut om bien faire la taille sur ceste semblance, et sur les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fuer du blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocated shoulder should be reduced by raising it, and the arm should not be moved. Then, if it is pained when touched, or feels tight, and after reducing it, it should be held up with a splint. If it is painful to the touch, or feels tight, and after reducing it, it should be held up with a splint.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the break is behind the shoulder, you must reduce it all, and remove the splint, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are completed, if you employ the wound with wool wetted in oil and wine, then the doctor will apply other remedies until he is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enveloped by a seemingly borjον-like wrapping, with the softener for the testicles, and the patient grumbles a lot when it moves; and the doctor of this disease, so far as we can tell you his treatment, according to what the former did,
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You should make the patient sit on a soft seat, then pour the softener for the testicles down his throat from both sides, all along the vessel that is near the penis, and clean it with the scraper; then take an awl or needle with double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has been cut, and then quickly to the other end; then wrap them tightly, according to the length of the body, and trim the moist腐腐した血管; ثم عالج الجرح كما فعل الاخرون الذين قاموا بقطع الوعاء الدموي، حتى لا يبكي احدى الاخوين، لأن هذا لن يسبب أي ضرر؛ لذلك يجب سحب الاخوين معاً ؛ بحيث لا يفقد كل منهما ما تبقى من السائل.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Regarding the rupture of syrup, or extension on the belly in the region of the angers, whereby the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the loins; and this rupture is either of syrup, or of the extension thereof, and these two ways are due to causes: percussion, leap, braying, or a sudden grief imposed, and similar things; and the signs when it is of the extension of syrup, if it is that it comes little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even until near the end, so that the syrup hurries the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The signs are when it is of the rupture of syrup, that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscesses are different in appearance, as the skin becomes tight; and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body being affected by the syrup.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And at no time does it come out with the intestine, but is retained, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron, for fear that it will stick.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these cures of iron, for fear that it will stick. So order the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound, if he can; then take care above his throat, between your hands, and remove the bowels; then place the cure on top, and scratch off all the skin of the bowels; then bottle the intestines of the abdomen as far as you need to open the wound, and let them out; then scrape the surface clean from all sides; then bottle your right index finger in that part which follows the intestine, in that part which is between the white surface which is under the skin of the navel, and between the second surface, and away from behind the navel, and between the second surface; and with your left hand place your thumb against the skin of the navel, and press the navel against all the surface; and command the assistant to stretch out the navel, and to pull that which is behind the ligature; and feel with your two hands if there is any wrapped intestine or hard white surface, and if you find nothing, then bottle it in the abdomen below; then take a needle with a thick thread made of XX strands, and bottle it in the back part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the navels; after the size, then tie the strands together so that there are four strands; then join them together like a cross, and bind the surface, which we have said is under the skin of the navels, with a strong knot of two parts; then wrap the strands around, and tie them together in two parts, so that no threads come out of the stitches that the stitcher makes, and let the thread be longer than the first long knot of the two strings of the one; and after all the others according to the length that the navel carries; then join it again above the skin which is under the navels, so that it does not come apart, and bind it, as we have said before; then moisten the wool with oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the knot that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And there is no cautery of the white medicine that we have said after incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens and leaves the ligature as long as it seizes itself; and if it delays in seizing, so arise from cold water, and put on what we have said, as long as it seizes; then cure the wound with other treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old people said that it is done thus: as you would join the legs of a lamb, after cutting them slightly on the leg; then chop and cut, and treat the abscess of him who cuts, as long as the legs seize; and treat in this way as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	None of the text is visible in your prompt, so I am unable to translate it. Please provide the full text for translation.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the strings, if the wound heals and the plague is cured, as long as it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syrups are constipating, and have no effect on the incision, but the cauterization is effective in this area, and closer to being a cure.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Several times the leather of the joints is softened in some men, because the grease that is within them is softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when you want to treat it, to make a hole in its back, and to peel off the softened leather from the natural leather; then join the two lips together with one stitch or three, and hide it with thread; and then sew between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
dou chastrement	of treatment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	I know that chastisement is punished in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak about it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the mare should answer when it is questioned, and in treatment; and the other, because we have often had a need for the chastisement of certain animals to help us, as with goats and sheep and hogs and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisements are made according to two ways: either by attraction or by cleaving.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in warm water until the joint is softened and remaining; then grip it with your hand, until it is set and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	In the case of chastisement with a whip: let you take the beast and press its joints to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and strike each oaf with the handle of the whip until you have well skinned them; and leave no patch of skin without treatment, this mode of chastisement is milder than that made by attraction, since it may be that, through attraction, some part of the joints will be missing, so that the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	The hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners as men: one is that between the two crotches it is like the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is in women, and has on the leg hair also as a penis and two crotches.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of the man and the woman is that you copulate the joined ones all, and cure them so as others wounds; in the second manner, of the men whose urine jumps by the skin of the crotches, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tentipede.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	The tentipede is a joined one on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it as much as a hand, and it is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you have the surplus of the tentiginous vein at your hand or on the arm, and it is light; and do not make too much of a fire, lest there be an escape of blood, then cure with other cures until he is well; and at another place that comes out of the mouth of the mare, and use it, and perhaps throw it over, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and because of this they called him the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you cut it, as we have said before, the tentiginous vein, and cure until she is well.
de erratique	of errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratique is if the nature of the woman is not yet perceived, or if the hernia is small; and it is natural by birth, or accident due to disease that has come about; or it is by carriage, or by subtle or special medicine, and it is made perfect in the mare, or in the coast, or the side, or wherever it may be; and its ability to conceive, childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the regard of the bailialty.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If you're stooping forward, it's close to appearing, whether it's to your ears or to the side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it's a small hernia, and it's close to appearing, if you hurry, and right then: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then the hernias form, as long as the small hernia is still round, and the hernia has risen; then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the spot, and lie the woman on her side every day, so that he cannot stand up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	If the hernia is hard and thick, then you should cut it with the scythe-like knife that looks like a fern leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the hernia is like a horse's neck, if you suspend it and cut it; and apply medicines that stop the bleeding, just as in the case of a dragon, incense, together with honey; then bring a broad stick, so that the wound cannot heal; and do this for a long time, and apply linseed oil; then cure it with other remedies until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a woman gives birth to a child, if it is done according to this method, then absesses may not form.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the mother who has an abscess, one must not touch with fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	are openings of veins in which, without surgical cutting, and when the hemorrhoids are old, they become swollen; and we have spoken in the dissection about the appearance of the arrow, and the signs, and I will say here those that bring healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the swollen vein, when they are fully developed in the mother, and do not hurt unless one is cut with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the vein, one can feel them, are those that can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then is let the swollen vein be caught with pliers, and cut at its roots, then powder medicines restraining blood, as here and there and dragon's blood and incense and similar things; then pour his legs on the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if pain comes, then she should sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit it with honey and so, and make an ointment to put on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if it doesn't, then apply hot poultices to the back and do not hurt the mamelles; then take another, and the liquid in oak-leaved or apple-leaved juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, care to cover the place well as I have said above; and then cure it until it is healthy. The herb called "albathir" is red, and looks like a sharp bush, so cover it as I have said; and then cure it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of the wound from the tooth
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Various types of abscesses can appear in the mouth, such as cancerous abscesses, painful abscesses, Herpes, festulums, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Il covient donc que je die en ce traité l'apôtre chaut qui vient en la marie, qui n'est mie des apôtres que coûlent bowe; et si tu vois savoir l'ouvraige de fer, si regarde se li apôtres est agus en l'encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fièvre, et s'il devient rouge, se tu le peux voir.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	It is necessary therefore that I die in this treatise the apopléctique aphorism which comes in the marathon, which is not an aphorism but a painful bow; and if you know the work of iron, if you look, the aphorisms are acute at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and the hand is wet to the palm, if it is convenient that you cover the head, you will lead the spatemile; and when the bow is empty, if it is convenient for you to put into the wound tents wetted in oil of roses or green oil dry; then place the tent completely outside the wound at the end of the bone, and on the other side of the bone wet with water or dried marrows; then heal after II days of poultice coming before this one, until it is healthy; and never raise the bone and the wound by means of a cyst of water and honey, and afterwards of water or roots of licorice and argol long boiled; then refresh with the poultice.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the bone, you will keep yourself from boiling with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is important that you recognize the signs of natural childbirth: when you see a woman rushing down, and she wants to smell the air: then quickly the baby will come out; so you know that this birth is according to nature, and the child comes out with its head first, and the second one with it; and when you see these signs, then gently squeeze her belly, so that the baby comes out quickly; because when it goes out with its head, the second one comes with it, and the married man cleans himself of his excesses through good purification; and what happens otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes out with its feet, but comes out with its neck or shoulder, and its hands, or sometimes comes out with its stomach, or often, and is turned around by accident onto its neck, and in other bad shapes; therefore it is important that you be wise and careful in these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby falls on its head by a natural fall, and the woman gives birth in pain, and the strength of the child is weak; if the mother puts her onto a saddle or if the women hold her; and then she heats oil or fenugreek, and then pours the wine between her two little sputums whose form it has:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If the baby falls on its head by a natural fall, and the woman gives birth in pain, and the strength of the child is weak; if the mother puts her onto a saddle or if the women hold her; then she heats oil or fenugreek, and then pours the wine between her two little sputums whose form it has: and splits the second one, and covers her fingernail with that moisture that is in there; and presses the woman's belly as much as the baby goes down, and if it does not go down, then it is necessary to rub her with muskroot of fenugreek with oil of sisle-ment; then she makes her press and shake for a condition, and holds her mouth and her nose for an hour: then now the baby.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Et s'il a deux mains libres, si tu lui demandes de les bouger un peu; et si elles ne peuvent pas entrer, fais asseoir la femme sur un siège, et place ses pieds surélevés; puis fais tomber le siège par terre, et attache la femme, pour qu'elle ne trébuche pas; et s'il a deux mains libres, et que tu ne peux pas les lui enlever, il meurt, et lui coupe les mains avec un couteau qui est devant, et retire l'enfant, et le remets sur son dos.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	and the child's legs will be in front of him.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, if you need to make it stand a little; and then turn it slowly, until it is even; then grip it from the feet and stretch it a little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	He can jump up to his knees, if you need to instruct him to grip, and make it jerk its body; if he jumps, then God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not done so as we have said, if the joint turns little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is leichtly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For then it is leichtly. And if it is not done so as we have said, if one takes musk of aloes, and oil of sesame, and gum that is melted, and grinds it all in a mortar; and puts it on the nature of woman within and outside this ointment, then let her sit in cold water until she is wet through to her ribs; and when she is wet, let her be girdled with myrrh, and let it be put on, and let it remain for an hour; then let her sit on a chair, and then make her sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose, and lightly pinch her belly, because the sickness is now coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's birth between his legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the baby comes in this form, if you put your hand on it little by little; then go down on his neck, and hang him by the feet, and lie down on my bed; and fold your hands little by little, and then take your hands on his belly, and draw out the water as far as it goes; and let the baby not jump, if you catch his legs and move them around, then move his belly upwards, then pour your hands; and bring the baby little by little; and tell the woman to lean back as long as the baby is coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the child who comes out with one hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	if it cannot be brought back, if she does not want to walk, if she sits down on a chair and brings her knees together, then I will bring the hand; and if she still does not give birth, if you make her lie down on her side, then study to bring back the hand; and let the baby come out according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and tell her to lean back as long as the baby is coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	about the issue of the child on his neck, and had spread its hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	Let the babe's feet be held still, then slowly turn them and gently stretch them; and when they are straightened out, put them on a dry, muscled surface of the bed and oil them slightly, as we have said; then order him to move his feet slowly; and when you have done this, let him sit on a chair, and order him to lean forward; and the baby will sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same method for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this same operation for all the second part, so cover up the second part with your hand, as long as the moisture is gone; and if the baby cries out or turns his face or neck, so that he doesn't cry, then put the child down, as long as you have done it properly, and order the woman to lean forward a little: and then do it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins issue
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born many times, and never three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, and has not happened before.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an unusual thing, and do not live, if so it is; but I know that, when they are multiplied, and are devised by the physician who is bound to the boil; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they are born with the help of medicine, as we have said, and if the physician is subtle, and does it quickly and lightly; then do it so that it may be for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Many times are formed in the womb of one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and the physician knows everything; for sometimes similar things happen; so do as is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; if it is necessary that you know whether her woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident by which she might die; if it is necessary that the woman be strapped to her back, and her hips bent downward, and her legs raised; and the minister dyes her from two sides, where she is tied to the bed so that she can be treated for the descent of the child; then rub her mouth with moist oils with aleth and fenugreek and linseed seed, then oil her hands with these oils and these muscaraiges; then pour them into her mouth lightly, then wants him to let him or hold him so that he can put oncines that are suitable for this, and takes care that the child is dressed appropriately so that it descends on his head; then puts the oncines in his hair or in his neck or in his mouth or in his cheek or in his jaw or near his sides, and the descent is on her feet, he puts or holds him and cuts at the cost. And it is necessary that he dye the oncine with his right hand, and puts the scabbard between his two hands with his left hand, and pours it with his whole hand lightly, and puts the oncine in any of the places that I have said, until it comes out to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the oncines:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then put another oncine, where you need it, so that the extractions are even; and then make them even by moving from one side to the other, so that they come out, and keep the onions' teeth so that they hold, as this is their shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If one part delays, then anoint it with oil from both sides and squeeze it in that part, and draw the other part; and if none of it delays, then put this oncine where more is needed or higher up, and do so until all of it comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes before the other and cannot be reset due to stretching, then wrap it in a blanket until it is all out; then cut it at the joint of the foot or the ankle, and likewise do the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et si la tête de l'enfant est grosse et il est bloqué dans le canal, ou il a une pointe aiguë assemblée, alors vous devez presser le spatumile épineux entre vos deux mains, et frotter la pointe et en extraire l'aiguille; ou vous la retirez avec l'instrument qui est appelé "almidach", de lequel la forme vient avec les instruments ou la chapastre qui est après celui-ci; et ainsi même il fait que le bébé ait une grosse tête naturellement; et puis retirez les os aux tenaille, et si la tête saute, elle est extraite à la force, si elle est fendue, jusqu'à ce que l'humidité qui est là parte; et s'elle ne peut pas sortir, alors le déchire en morceaux avec une lime; et s'il est gonflé dans l'abdomen ou pressé sur les côtes, alors vous devez le percer tant que la humidité s'échappe.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is stuck on his feet, then there is a light pull, and he should turn towards the mouth of the mare.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck on his stomach or chest, then cover that with a drape wrapped around your hand; and cut the stomach or chest until the moisture that is causing it comes out; and if another member has come loose and stayed put, then pull your hand away from the mare's mouth completely, and then tie it tightly or bind it; and if the mouth of the mare is constricted by an abscess that has come hot, there should be no need to work it; but rather, apply moist, greasy things; and apply poultices, and cut into the abscess with sharp, wet tools and moisten it.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is stuck on his ribcage, and you can make it even, then apply what we said about the living child; and if one has no power to do this, then cut it into pieces, leaving none of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, let him bring the one that we said in the abscesses come to the mare; and if the pain comes from the inside, let it be restrained with water, and let other cures be brought.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consult another on that, and refuse another.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the abscess burst, and it began to swell greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of great attraction, and in it put a bone, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for the woman's womb does not have bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to examine the wound, and with my two hands, as long as the woman was in a better condition; and waited for the woman's pain to subside a little from her place; and I did not remember this ointment before except that when the master sees an unusual thing, he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressure, where we hold the shoulders; and turning around, II places the shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be thinner than the restringer, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the pipe should be wide enough, and its margin of wood should be long by a palm and a half or a little more; and these two supports are to be fixed in the mouth of the wife from one side to the other, with a length of half a palm or a little more; and these two supports are to be fixed in the mouth of the wife so that when the horns are turned they open.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, à sa semblable plus subtile et plus légère, soit faite de fuste d'ébène ou de buis, selon la semblance des tenailles; et ait à II chaise II ajoutsements, si comme tu vois, d'une palme de long, et II doigt de large; et lorsqu'tu vois ouvrir la marre à tout l'instrument, si fais s'asseoir la femme sur le lit, les pieds pendant et les jambes ouvertes, puis bouttes les II ajoutsements ajoutes ensemble en la marre, et tien le chef de l'instrument désoz entre ses cuisses; puis ouvres ta main à tout l'instrument, si comme tu as fait aux tenailles également, selon la quantité que tu vois ouvrir la bouche de la marre, tant que le balais fasse ce qu'elle veut.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	Cette arme est complètement recouverte, et ses formes sont multiples; et lorsqu'il la regarde prête, tant plus il est pressé dans son travail, et plus élevé en position pour sa quantité.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not trust the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is retarded in birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her child in her womb, and then let it come out with force, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; and if she dies because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that doesn't work, I can try, and put a lid or pot over it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, as thyme, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialine, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then place one pipe or pot with the water, and the other head in the woman's mouth, and let it hang until the vapors come out of the woman; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you jump the second time.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains after this cure and is not well, order her to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in musk of aloe, and then put it in its place and try again; and when she has found it, if she grasps and extends it little by little correctly, so that the ring does not slip at the extraction; but you must move it slightly from side to side and then pull it off; then she will come and untie herself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the ring is tight and stretched, we have already said the cure of shaking and vaporizing herbs; and if she does not respond to all that we have said, you must take care not to follow the advice given to the woman at the ring's mouth; but it is necessary for her to apply the ointment of tetrafarmacon to the clitoris, then she will rub it and remove it, and she will be well; but anyway, when she rubs herself in this way, if a bad odor comes out of her stomach and head, and she bleeds.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary then smoke-inhales that are convenient for this: no one of the ancients has experienced an inhalation of nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument to which you smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and of the second one if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And is like to a dog, and put the head thin in the nature, and the chaps wide on the fire; and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet pierced the fundament, but a wise physician pierces it at his right time, and he does not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and binds up the place so that it is not touched; then he puts another wet cloth in wine and oil, and applies ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put or a punt a cane of wood, and let him hold his hand up, and be osted when he falls down in the room.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no sudden recovery from a wound or an abscess; if suddenly covered: if it is cured, as we have said, with the cane of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodation, and more painful than those that come from the fundament defuer, or in l'espace des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; and when this nodation is old, if it opens, and again moist awouse blainche or subtilz bowe, and no such fistula persans; and are known by this that he en ist or egestion or ventositeit when the patient makes egestion, and by adventure in saut uns vers.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they pierce to the bladder and up to half of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the scrotum, and up to the knot of the cow's tongue.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so recognize where the fistula reaches to the fundament and does not reach; and that you pierce your little finger or fundament, and pierce a thin needle of gold or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has a twist, if you pierce with a thin piece of twine or hair from a horse as far as you can feel the twine or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there comes no perforation or wind or sight, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; but if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches up to the bladder or up to the conduit of the urine, if there is urination, and cannot be healed by drugs.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has penetrated just up to the joint of the loins, then try to bring it back to its place. If there is no tortuosity and no pain around the joints, then it has already been brought back; otherwise, there is no medicine or quick fix by way of touch; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure other than hard work, and the vain desires of foolish people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	If it has not penetrated and is not old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and that is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lowers his legs up to his loins, and his loins are bent towards his belly; then pour a drop of rain, or a spoonful of water if there is tortuosity, until you know where the penetration comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foundation, then you should put your index finger there, and if you feel that the tent is pricked, then uncover where you feel it between your thumb and the syphac or the char, then know that it is persistent; otherwise, do not work on it unless it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	All the time it is possible to heal some well, but this happens rarely; and the help that is given to them, if one heats the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and pour it directly into the fistula until it comes off from the foundation; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these charnel-like cars have burned away, which are resembling to an owl's feather; and then cure the moist wounds with a wet poultice until those charnels come off, and then bind them with a plaster.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healthy, then that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is not healthy, then it cannot be healthy; and if he tries to stand up, and does not pierce down to the foundation which is at the bottom, and there is between his two feet a thick covering of cloth or of medicine, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering meets the skin; if the bandage of the trouble of the fistula, and brings it together before the covering, and then applies the cautery afterwards, as long as it comes to the top of the covering; and is delivered the bandage, and will be well; then make those cloth-capes that seem like a bird's feather, and there remain none.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if he does not get well, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with medicine water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: that is to say, the burning of these jointed cloths, and the cooling of blood and the drying of the moisture; then cure the tents which are wet with broomsticks or with dry hay, as long as they rub against each other, and burn those cloths in the fire in the broomstick; then cure the wound with the medicines which are hard and solid, and those which are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the foundation, and is separated from the heart, it bottels the flow of urine at the foundation, and inquiry that one.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the urge, and it is between II is the towel or syfac or char, or it is ready to pierce, there are only three ways of hope, by administration of one of these three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you can put it on fire and heal it as we have said; do not go too far in doing so that you cover the covering that holds the foundation, and let the discharge come by the voluntary way; then heal it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean up after it has been cut away from the foundation, or with a tent or another tool pointed; then burn this rotten wood that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and delay the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: so it will be a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no fists according to this way: and it is when you plug the tent in the fistula, and it is or it is on the basis of the delicate skin of the top, if he takes a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I plug it with thread in 2, and I plug the tent on all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then remove the thread of that pierced, so that you plug your two at the foundation; and bring together the head of the thread, and assemble the two shoulders together, and pull them one from another, and leave it a day or two; and do not restrain it at all, as long as the thread pierces those threads that are between the two, and groan; then cure the wound until it is sewed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If it does not punch through, if you try to pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too completely stopped up.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to cover the wound completely when it is completely stopped up, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spud with thorns that is used to make the fistula is sharp on one side and dull on the other; and on the other hand it should not be completely covered, for this is not how it should be done, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: those that are inside the fundament, like grain of resin, and there are small and large ones; and those that come out at the top, but some come out a little and some a lot, and they go out at the top of the fundament; but those that come out have a little moisture, and then dry up or bleed a little, and their color is like that of the flesh; and the cure for those who have them inside the fundament is this: you must command the patient to urinate often until the fundament is dry, and then take them with your fingers, then cut off the roots; if they are difficult to hold because of moisture, take them by a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and pull them out with your hands, then cut them off, and sprinkle on them hot powders that are used for cauterization; or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, for other cures do not help until they are well; and if the fundament cannot come out, then use a clister to cleanse the patient by swallowing and spitting it out with force, so that it comes out freely; when the patient is relaxed, and the roots of the hemorrhoids are forced out from the fundament, then the cure is light; and you take them with your fingers or tweezers, and cut them off, then cure them as we have said, until they are well, and avoid cutting them with a blade.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you bring the suture according to this method: take a tortuous thread, and pour it into a needle, and then pull the thread over and pierce the needle from the other side, and bring the two ends of the thread through the needle, and if they are wide apart; draw the thread together, then tie it, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave it for the excess blood to flow; then put a wet cloth in oil or wax on the foundation, and place it on the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and then leave it until they have stopped bleeding, and when they have healed, apply ointment and other remedies until they are well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	For the drying up of the ends or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	For often there is drying up at the ends in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is worthless.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you rub to the point of an spitمول or your finger nail the bark from above, which does not leave it to moist; then heal as long as it is sodden as it should be; and if it cannot be sodden, start again with a stronger rasp than before, until it heals and is barked; then heal as long as it is healed.
dou fremit	He will sweat.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	It is a small spot that appears before the collar, and it goes on completely; and there is no more tickling than usual, and one feels it as if he were dead, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the healer should take a feather from an goose or a strong vulture, and put that feather on the sweat, until the purple ring surrounds the sweat all around; then bring your hand to the entire feather as you cope all around the sweat, and put it completely, and scrape the sweat from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a dog's or horse's head or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run over it.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not cut it, lest it tear, but press it together; and if you see, cauterize the pain, as it is in front or with fire-cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the glans
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No times is made on glans of silver or of iron, or of molten brass or of tin; and no times are made on these small and large instruments, according to those that they are brought to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then, who are brought to the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the glans is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say that the distension is where the abdomen is tied up, as you see it, and the ribs are pierced from within; and on one side there is a great hole, and on the other; and someone puts medicine into an egg of beef or parchment, and pierces all around the small holes, and sets between each hole a piece of strong wire twisted X-shaped or round the hole, and ties the abdomen together as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument is in front of a strong thread, then blister; and this is the shape of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or sheep's fat or some similar thing be applied to the blister with a cloth, then pour it lightly; then the minister holds it in both hands until it is completely dry, then removes the blister, and lifts up the patient's legs to the wall, and lets the medicine come out, if so much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cleanse him of the disease of decay from the abdomen, and the medicine hastens to come out, then remind him until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then let the cauterization be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle cauterization so that the skin is drawn out:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the cures for hands and medicines, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and because of what makes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things because of which wounds are made are by stoning with a stone, and chopping with an axe or a machete or a lance or a staff or similar objects; or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck, or on the head, or on the breast, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds, for the reminder will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from falling on stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about the skull: if it is done soon, he will be saved from the head itself, but if it is due to blood coming from the wound, he will be saved by turning away from the part that was injured; and stop the patient's drinking of wine and fattened meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he does not save himself, if his meat is reduced, and he does not drink wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if it comes to the skull, wet with oil and rub down; or in wine that stings; and if there is no pain in the skull, if it comes when the wound is fresh, and is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later; and if he has moved it, put on some onions, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great like a sword-cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stretching, but are brought together by sewing, like I say to wounds in the belly from sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone and oozing, and only holds for a little while, then cover it; but then cure the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard leather, and command the patient to eat large meats, like roasted beef and poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rot on the leather and it has not reached the bone, then cover it completely, and burn it, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then cut the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light; and that you put this powder in so it hardens as the fire moves over it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and powder it finely, and apply the wound, and bind it tightly, until it has healed well and joined together all its blood; and then bind it firmly, and leave it undisturbed, if it does not swell; for we do not bandage the medicine until it is well.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one use live coal alone, unless one has incense or dragon' s blood, but the fire has moved over the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved over the wound, even slightly, then put on this powder; but on some herbs that are digestible, or corn flour made with water and honey, until it has dried up; and then treat it with other remedies until it is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle tweezers; and I will tell you about fractures of the head later on.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the base of the neck is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the neck, if there is no other means than to let nature take its course, and not put anything that restricts it, for this would hurt the neck and make it retract; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its flow with the brain, which is the highest member; but make medicine sweet, as if warm water washed with rose oil, and rinse it too with warm water, and other stones of mine according to this method, and moisten with oilm
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and then heal until he is well.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he is thin and full of bowels, then pierce or cut deeper; and if an artery is cut, and blood comes out, so that it becomes dry, and the wound heals, and cauterize according to this craft; and if the spitting from the throat is cut, or the voice, and keep it in check, so that the meat goes well, if the cure on the chin of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form; and then let it be moved forwardly, and leave it for some days, then heal with ointments that I have said; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, then throw them all out if you can, and those you cannot throw out, leave it until the wound rotten and become gangrened and let the issue come out; and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bones in the wound, and there is a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the plaster.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the lance or dagger wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, then look to the wound for windiness of the patient: because then the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep and is fresh throughout all its blood, then do not put on the powder at first, nor tie it up so that the blood does not run freely, and return to the wound, and cool the patient; but if you have an ointment, apply it three times a day; and if you do not have an ointment, place raw wool in the wound to soak up the moisture, and let the patient lie on the wound for III days, or IV, or more; and then you will see the bone movements, so know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the tetanus and other cures as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot be cured, then sew up that there is a fistula; and thus the cure should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, deep or on the back, then cure this one who is ahead; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has broken into pieces of bone, then look at the wound, and the harsh ones if they are dislocated; and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound fester, so that the extractions will be easier; and for other wounds on other members, the judgments are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	the rupture of the abdomen is great and long and small; from a large wound there is sometimes an exit for the intestines, or for the intestines to be pushed back, so that the intrusion of air; and the stitch is more difficult, and never less than a small wound that a large one, so that it is worth pushing the intestines back further than they come out, and for this reason the intestines swell at times until they feel cold, if they are pushed back further, and for this reason a small wound is worth more than a large one, so that it is worth pushing the intestines back to their place that the others II. And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to three ways: the two common stitches have in the stitch of the abdomen, and the stitch of the other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common with the other wounds; and yet they are more proper with the stitch of the abdomen, and I will say each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is fouled, and there is something to be done, it should be done by one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with wind.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when he is swollen, heat him up with the third method: dip a sponge or a thin drape in warm water only, or cook it in squinant and cumin and spicery, and strain the intestines until the swelling comes out; and never do this while resting, and let it lie that it may be cured by itself.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go away, moisten the intestines with water or wine and dry herbs are cooked, for by this way the entrance is slightly closed to a few things; and if it cannot enter, then cut a little hole in the wound with the instrument where one cuts the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to lie down so that he does not move much, because we do not need to cut him unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting: if you split it inside and turn it over, and look at it like this:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestines protrude, if you can return them to their natural place in their own proper place, for this is difficult.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large and is in the lower part of the abdomen, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if the wound is in the lower part of the abdomen, let the head and chest be raised higher than the lower parts; and in this way it is fitting to treat what I have said about large and painful wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you should dress them, then take two needles and a strong thread; according to the size of the wound, cut off a piece of thread that is as long as the width of the wound, then leave two inches of space at either end, and insert the needle or needles from one side of the wound to the other, passing through both sides of the skin as if you were sewing a shirt; then take two pieces of thread, each half an inch long, and tie them together at one end, and pass them under the first stitch, so that they are well hidden; then sew the edges of the wound together with these threads, leaving about two inches between each stitch; this method is good for small wounds, but for larger ones you should use smaller needles and stronger thread; and do not push the needles too far into the flesh or skin, lest they tear the wound before it is fully healed; and if you are sewing up a large wound, leave the needle in place while you dress the patient; then take two needles and insert them from one side of the wound to the other as if you were sewing a shirt; then tie these two needles together at their points, and pass them under the first stitch, so that they are well hidden; then sew up the wound with these needles, leaving about half an inch between each stitch; this method is good for large wounds, but for smaller ones you should use thinner needles and stronger thread.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine when it had been outside for 22 hours, and the wound was sealed after 15 days, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not treat it with any medicine, for I was in a place where there was no such thing, and I put on cotton wool twice a day over the wound, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two methods of sewing: take the needle and thread from the outside end all the way to the inside; when it has gone through the flesh, turn the thread around so that it comes out on the other side, and tie it in such a way that you are unable to see where the stitch begins and ends, just as the skin-dresser does when he sews fur, and leave the thread hanging on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the sewing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, as Galiens properly describes it, is when there is no wound and the two parts are naturally joined together, and one of the heads is applied to the other head in such a way: pierce an awl or needle through one of the chief hairs near the mirach, and let the two heads remain; then turn the awl and pierce it from the outside part until it reaches the inside at the two heads; then pierce each of them from the outside part until it reaches the inside, in the two other heads that are on the other side; and this is the mudred method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says this, and no one testifies against it, that you must sew the belly to two needles, or thread in each; and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with corroding needles; and know that when the rupture is deep in the belly, this sewing is more painful than that of the other belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	As for the judgment of the wound, it is the same as for other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, as well as the flesh has been moved, if you remove the intestine, and wipe off the blood; then put on the powder while wet, and if the flesh has been moved, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and pluck out the hair, and let the sinews be tied, and the mirror; then treat the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on, as soon as it starts to heal, cotton wool, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "jeun", cannot heal when they are torn, and this is because of the location of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and because their nature is close to that of infants.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the arrow jumps out of the wound, put it back behind as well as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turning towards yellow or black, you must find the place that is black, from which no blood comes, because there are veins and arteries; then cut between the ties, and hang the two heads down from the side of the wound all the way to the back in order to ease the extraction when the arrow jumps out, and let the wound bleed.
de la routure dou boueil	from the laceration of the bowie
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, you can restore it in some places, because I have seen that a certain man was navered or stabbed with a sword; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became swollen and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and wind; I put on cure according to what I could find, and did not cease to be subtle until it was healed, and I sewed up the leaks.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sewn up, I doubted that the patient had done him harm to his belly; and there was no harm, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and none of the experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he must be tied up in some way: take twine from big testicles, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the twine has opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that he can draw his mouth away; and then he covers the head, and this remains so that he cannot untie it, and then he puts another twine after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed up; and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief wound is in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie up the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, in some way: take the end of this thread of intestine that has been carefully stripped off, and then tie it to the end of another fine twine made from linen thread, then wrap the thread around the needle, and sew up the intestine, and cut it back at the tear; and this method of sewing with twine is only good in accordance with the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, there is no question but that subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	That said, all wounds and abscesses, once they have healed, are called "fistula" in general, and even more so when they have dried up and cracked open.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the green medical book, hard and white, where there is no pain, and it also dries up like a bird's feather; and it never breaks all at once, but sometimes thick and sometimes thin; nor does it break easily, and I have already spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no wound, except by one of the VIII causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or corruption; or because of its malice; or because there is something hard inside, and on the lips, which does not allow it to break; or because there is too much wax; or because the place is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the cure; or because what corrupts is a pestilence in nature; or because digestion is late in that region, and health is late, and disappears by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to make known to you the cure of fistula, which is done by work with hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas may occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sinus, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes that it touches the principle limb, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of great difficult treatment, and there is no labor, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the principle limb, and you have engaged to cure it, and you have recognized it, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, reach for it; and if the fistula is bent, reach for it with a slender tent of pliable metal, for the plies bend around the curvature; and if the fistula has broken hands, and you cannot recognize it well with tents, then make it leak with one of the breaks, because it moistens so much from one break to another, and cleans itself; then recognize it carefully with your power, that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and it is completely healed, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand upon it, and the place where he feels it; and when you have truly recognized the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then recognize it according to what I have said, and open up the corruption and rotten things that are within; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right side, it is necessary for you to recognize it completely, as much as you can, then put wet tents in medicine water, and bottle them up to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrode the excess that is reserved at the bottom; and then put oilmens in janrapping medicine, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted because of the fistula, then recognize it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If in the middle of the night you feel a sharp pain in your main members, as we have said before; and if your nose is covered, and there is decay and darkness, then keep the king until all the decay is gone, then heal with medicines that hinder harm as long as he is healthy; and if he is not healthy, let him lie down as before, knowing that you have not yet arrived: if you discover it and want to get up, wait until you are at the bottom of it, and take out all the decay, then restore the joint; and if it is sound there, then it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too complete that you cannot come there; if there is no other problem except to ease nature; and if there is one small rotten bone, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with a suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, and if the moisture makes you opposite, and there is no error or fear, then cut and moisten and heal; and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something on the wound that will cause pus, and let it remain as long as the pores are filled with pus between the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then keep the corruption for so long that all the bone turns black, then treat the wound; and if there is a lot of decay and it comes down to the root of the bone; then bind it up completely until the decay has been stopped, and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you can take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old who had a pain in his leg from an inner cause that brought the matter to his leg, and he developed a large abscess, and there was no obvious reason for it to open; but because of their foolishness they caused the abscess to open so much that it corroded much material, and became a fistula, and it came to the point that everyone had an attack of fever and moistening of the body; and many times I saw him being cured after two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being cured, and what was corroding through the fistula to a great extent; and the color of his leg became red, and had a yellow-orange color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of those openings and then searched all the openings and found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried then, and filled one of the openings with as much as I could discover of the bone, and found it corroded and pierced, and the corruption extended inward from the bone; I realized what the bone looked like from the outside, and made sure there was no further corruption, except for that which I had seen; and then I began to treat the wound with medicines over a long period of time, and it would not bind; and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and realized it, and then broke it, and leaned forward to bind the opening; but I only managed to fill about a palm's width of the bone with my hand, and then I stopped; afterwards I bound it with medicines; and it healed and bound firmly, and did not require to be renewed except out of fear for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and out of fear of death which I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car por l'evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l'os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n'ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l'aleir ne a venir.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the trunk, then it shall be handled in such a way: take the thread, and draw it at the head of the bone which is open, and command that he stretch it upwards; and put another thread, thicker than the first, on top of the thread which is stretching upward, and secure them both together, so that you can pull out the broken part, and uncover the bone below where it needs to be pulled, so that the thread does not tear the bone; and put a fire or a hot rock on top of the bone to heat it up; and as long as one can see and feel the corruption, stretch it again. And stretch it another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open anymore, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole arm; then put a hot brand on it, and then silk from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the silk come out of the long side of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then break the joint corrupted, and let the silk go into the bone or into which it belongs from the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other injury except at the end; and if the corruption is at the hand's grip, or at the grip of the foot, then it is very bad, but nevertheless you should ask about that corrosion how it opens; and purify it with all means that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose it to you; and know that the chisel and the silks to cover these bones are many, according to the bone's sitting and appearance of the bones, and their size and subtility, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to prepare the instrument for each appearance of work, and know that the work will show you the instrument with which you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument in which you are needed according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if it is due to moisture or due to a fall; and when you have applied the medicine of that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, then cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from this by fire, or by evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and then that corrosion moves from one member to another, taking hold throughout the body; if you hurry to cover it, and if it is due to the percussion of some poisonous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes and similar things, if the corrosion is at the top of the two, then cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes up to the arm, then cover it at the collarbone; and if it passes the collarbone, then it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue; and do this whenever the corrosion comes or pi
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the pain comes when you work, then cauterize the place thoroughly, or put on some binding powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then tie the injured member with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it is healthy; and I will tell you what happened to the man at home in some detail: he got a blackening that looked like burning from fire, and this corrosion came first on its due course of the foot, so that it discolored all the foot; and when the honorable man saw the corrosion, then he covered his foot with copper, and was cured; and after a long time the corrosion returned to the second joint of the hand, and came to me, and I put things that rub after cleansing the cors, and could not stop the corrosions; and he thought that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want that, that I had hope to reflect the matter; and also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtues of the man were weak; and he was desperate completely, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with copper, and was cured; and I have heard only that one should do the other if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and delays so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels; and then it rots and pierces, and jumps the bowels, and remains the viscera closed, as well as our vassals; and the skin that is above is also thin like the drapes untied, and does not run down to the bone, nor down to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so elongated that it comes down to the bone perfectly, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin is what you cover all this skin, and most when it is thin, like our drapes; and does not burn for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are certain that the skin will toughen, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is like a carriage cover, then you use Egyptian medicine made in this way: take olive oil, and alum, and equal parts, and put the skin in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red, and thickens as well; and then you take it out of the water, and squeeze it; do this seven times, until the skin is very hard, and the wound has healed; and never use water from ashes when this medicine is not present, but you squeeze ashes from a vine branch, and pour water on them, and let it run off, and clisterize it, as long as you know that the skin is well healed; and if the patient cannot endure the pain, or Egyptian medicine or water from ashes does not suit him, then clistere made of honey and wine, where honey has the property to heal and wash, and wine makes one healthy; and when you have done this, and are certain that the skin is well healed, if you clisterize it with this medicine, and it toughens the skin, and you squeeze it into plaster, and make it with olive oil and wine; or you clisterize it with various medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the section on the treatment of ointments; and if the wound is small, and the clistere cannot enter, then you widen it a little with iron, and put a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it has widened; and if the wound is too wide, then you leave it open where the clistere can enter, and if the opening where the bowels come out is above, then you make it lower, and if it is below, then you raise it higher.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bow is in perfect shape, do not leave it hanging; and if you cannot cover the breast with it as you see, arrange it in such a way that the bow runs down to the lowest point it can reach, for when the bow is in perfect shape, do not leave it hanging; and if you cannot cover the breast with it as you see, arrange it in such a way: that the bow runs lightly downward, leaving nothing of the bow; and take medicines that strengthen it to be placed over the chest, and wrap them in linen cloths that cover all the chest; then cover them tightly at the top where the opening is slightly larger than the first, since ointments are applied on another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and put it on the chest opening to tighten the bow, and do not take off the large cloth except after many days once; and he who is on the chest opening, often takes it off to take off the bow, and knows what runs from the bow, if it is poison or blood or enough or digested or undigested; and take care that the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that flows on the chest opening, know that the breasts are beginning to feel warm, and approach them; and then unbind them in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, if you change another cloth, renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become swollen and uncomfortable after many days, know that the breasts do not ache.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison enters slowly over a long time, then do not despair of health, for the health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some people whose breasts become swollen and uncomfortable after a long time, knowing that the breasts do not ache; and if the breasts remain late to get air, and are stretched, then use medicines that dry out moisture and soften it in virtue, as is done by anointing finally, for there is much vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take anointing finally, and do it with oil rosin, and rosin of vine equal in substance; then confit and use it; and this same thing does better when anointing finally is not present, or you take mirr, and aloe, and incense, and grind them, and sprinkle the powder on honey when it is out of the fire; and then put it in a cloth, and set it on the breast, and never administer it with an aromatiser far away, and roots of heaven, which is also like flour of times and centaury; and use simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is long, and is not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is complete, and makes impression in the bone, or at hard members, or at joints; if the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toe of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A bunion is an aposteme that grows out of the joint of the thumb from the base of the hand, or from the foot, or perhaps in another two; and when it has grown out, and no care is taken, then it comes to form a bunion, and it becomes hard and hot so much that there is pain in it, and the joint becomes large, and its color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it then as we said in the section on treatment, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the surplus that has been left of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; but if the nail presses into the flesh, and irritates it, then you must take off the nail that presses, and cut it short, and lightly burn the edge with fire, and put on medicines that are hot and corrosive to remove it all; and then treat it with oil until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corruption est dans l'os, alors le coupe, et traitant-le fermement, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois la corruption doubler, alors le coupe selon ce qui a été dit ci-dessus, puis guéris-le tant qu'il soit guéri ; et s'il est brulé et enflé et sent une grande douleur, alors il convient que tu le guérisses en premier ; puis coupe l'ongle avec le couteau de façon transversale au-dessus, et veille à ce que la lame ne coupe pas au-delà du lit de l'ongle, car le patient ressentrait trop de douleur ; et s'il arrive, alors place quelque chose qui apaise.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	La douleur des doigts de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Les deux doigts qui naissent dans les mains de certains hommes sont parfois charnus, parfois osseux, et n'ont jamais d'ongles, et aucune racine de doigt ne naît dans certains de ces cas.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil who is born of two roots shall not move, and cil who is born of a joint of two roots, by chance shall move; the size of that which is charnus is so light, in some way: measure it at its root with a broad spatulate.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil who is born at the root of the joint must be carefully treated: if you hold him by the cup.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which is born or should be at the root of the derrièment, it is fitting that you first cap the heart completely up to the bone, then cap the bone with a suitable thread, and then treat it until it is well.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints which come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, or by the burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cap that which is joined by nature, according to its natural forms; then place between two pieces of thin cloth soaked in oil rosin, so that it does not join; or place between two pieces of fine linen, until the joints are joined, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Se soudemens comes to neither of its two with the palm, if grip it firmly as it should.
des vils	of ill-reputed
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The vis are large and wrapped in a thick, melanolic skin, which causes numerous members of the body to suffer; and as for those who walk on their feet and work and carry loads, they suffer more than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not administer any poultices, and then cure it from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure with iron should be done according to two methods: one is that of applying poultices, and then drawing out the black blood; and another method is that of lifting the vein up, and drawing it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting should be done according to this method: first, raise the leg of the healthy person with very hot water, until the large veins are slightly visible, then extract the leg of the sick person from above the knee down to the ankle; then cut the vein open in one place, or two, or three, wide enough, and draw out the blood little by little at your hand, as much as the sick person can bear it; and then bandage him, and order him that he color his meat with black dye; and then start again with the evacuation and cure when the veins are clear, and bandage the person.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped up together, and it is not straightened, as we have said, then you should break it cruelly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the shape of iron that one covers over the vis if it is curved, and does not cut it, so that it covers the vein; and it is a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where no herbs or trees grow, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this leads to skin rot that comes from within the body, spiraling between the skin and the bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of this injury are that an extremely large inflammation has come to the leg, then the joints change, and the injury begins to grow out, just as a root does from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the joints open up, then you wrap a piece of cloth from one-and-a-half to two inches long around each, and tie it, and leave the cloth hanging down the leg, and every time it comes loose, if the cloth is too long, cut off a part and wrap the rest, but do not cover it over its root, until it is all gone; for if you cover it, it will enter into the shell and bring about abscesses and rottenness where it is; so that this injury should be dealt with little by little until it is done, and leave nothing behind except a scar; and this chapter has been treated from five to ten handspan, and when you cut it, if it comes off easily or is bent, and pierces all the way down, so that everything inside is gone; and have medicines applied to it daily that cause rottenness, then heal it just as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And at no time to this vein with hands, and least when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot is, and there comes a great loss, and from which rain falls; so then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the worms that are born between the hide and the cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff disease," because it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that born between the hide and the cart, and goes everywhere ascending and descending, and feels well at the touch of one member to another, until it comes off the skin where it has gone, and disappears; and it is infected with some kind of pus, as if it came from worms and snakes and beetles and parasites, and doubts about its malice, because when it goes through the body, and reaches the head, and comes to the eye, sometimes enters, and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him recover and be drawn out, only then can we go: so it is necessary that you place the joint in its proper position and fix it with a strong and tight ligature; then lift up and draw out forcefully, and let his head fall perfectly into the bed, and if you do not see it, fire cauterize him from above until he dies; and the greatest damage he does is that he corronts the oil, as we have said; and if you see him coming with his head near the oil, then you should strain out his hair completely, then lift up, and draw out forcefully. And it is necessary to use the patient for the cleaning of the skin of medicines that dissolve bad humors, and sear himself with meat that is rotting.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen this one that I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arms; and immediately it felt like a worm going into her shoulder, sooner than anything else, as if it were quicksilver when it passed from one place to another; the pain left that place, and went into her shoulder, and then after a little while corrupted throughout her whole body, until she came to the other arm; then she told me that she was turning in bed again, as I had seen her do.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how much this woman moved her limbs from one member to another, for I have never seen such a thing with this disease.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Anyway, I have seen many people whose bodies move from one place to another with pain, but I have never seen such a thing as with this woman; and I thought that perhaps she had a tight body and her veins uncovered, and because of the constriction of wind that appeared; and I did not see it for this reason in those who are thin, and whose bodies and veins are relaxed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to heal this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens like we have said, tie above and below, and then cover as much as the constriction allows; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see blood in your eyes, if you treat with pills of putrid garlic, and pills of serapin, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	are various, according to their appearance and according to the parts of the body where they come from.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	have various shapes, as there are some with large points, small ones, curly ones, and those that are souded; and some have II angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and one that does not come from any member at all sometimes comes out according to II ways: or in a principal member it comes out like a brain, an ear, a liver, a pancreas, a rein, an intestine, a bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she dies and does not feel any of the members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, then you know: if it is necessary for you to remove this arrow, because death comes after many dispositions; and when that bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not perfectly taken out, then you draw it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrow pierces and makes the bone ache, and the medicine that is on top of the skull, and when there is paralysis and weakness and turning and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps it does not come out through the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses its speech and voice; and when that wound becomes wet and white like pus, and looks like fire; and if you notice this sign, then take care of it, and extract the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the sneeze when it comes is that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were wedged against something hard, not empty; and perhaps the sneeze also moves like the hairs, with a short pause in the middle, and then coldness and perspiration come, and fainting: so one knows that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the sneeze that does not bode well is that there is a sudden loss of consciousness and foam jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gasps for air and feels cold all over.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the sneeze comes in the cover of the back, it is a sign of delirience and great pain and sighing and movement of all the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the sneeze comes from the belly, perhaps it is a sign that something indigestible has come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters through the belly, and does not go out through the intestines, there is no hope for the patient's recovery or for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters into the bladder, and the urine flows out in spurts and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if as it happens and the neck and throat and shoulder and aid and spine and chest and legs, and the limb in question, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the neck or the artery, and it does not come out, then as I will tell you what happened to me, do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow entered into the throat at the root of the neck: I tried to take it out, and pulled it from the other side of the fat of the ear, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And throw an arrow that it enters the fat of the oil desoz the papeir desoz, and the arrow was re-set, and I could not get anything but the tip towards the furst, and the arrow was big of a turquiose arc, all I fer legier without ears; the game was sanez, and no came any bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I threw an arrow into the neck of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic to ears: I knew the beards, and I delayed as much as I threw it, and the Christians were sane.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I threw an arrow at a man that it entered his cheek or belly, and I thought he died; and then, after XXX days, if he did not return to his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I engaged it, and I threw it again, and did not have any bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you want to go to a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is closed with a patch; delay the arrow inside it, and do not change its natural course, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I know another man to whom an arrow has entered his face, and the wound was closed with a patch; and he delayed it in this way so as not to suffer great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I know a king's man who had an arrow in his neck, and the wound was closed with a patch; it was slightly tilted to the right side; and the patch was all torn up. I was called to heal him after it had been three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	There was a very tight wound.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I wanted to give it a long and subtle treatment, and I did not feel it; but he felt pain and prickling in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of an arrow; I put plaster on the wound to stop it from bleeding, so that the blood would not flow; and I saw the wound of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put plaster on it every day, and quickly resolved the wound, and delayed it for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound a corrosive medicine every day until it was open, and tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which was getting stuck at the place; then I removed it from the opening of the wound with a small tool, so that the wound opened; I waited for three months, and then I healed the wound so well that I pulled out the nails on both sides, and they couldn't come out; so I stopped using tools to make things subtle and invent ways to use them, until one day I got it right, so I put it on, and I closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of his nose could not be restored; but I restored it, and the wound was souded, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	And have you not heard about the quality of extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your cure on what I do not say, for the book cannot take away everything; but the master surgeons deal well with a small amount and with what is present and failing, they bring about nine operations and nine instruments to the dismemberment of strange things that come in this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are in the members or they are stuck except according to two ways: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which is stuck by the side where it enters, is an arrow entering into its flesh, and is never stuck at any other time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her leave the hair so long that it is not cut in the middle, and let it grow; and if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her stay like this for some days, and every day let her move a little; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, pierce it with a fine blade all around, so that the hair inside is stretched, and then pull it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and comes out at one of the temples, and some of the accidents that I have said can happen to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days, because if the arrow comes out only halfway, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone and not out, and does not come out until it reaches the temple, and the patient remains for some days without any bad accident, then the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is so stuck in here that it cannot be removed, then you should administer tar like I told you; and then treat the joint as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is reposed in the neck so that it cannot be seen, if you seek it with all your might; and if you feel it, if you treat it with any suitable tool; and if you cannot by the stretching of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then cut it as much as the wound is great; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, then remove or bend the ears of the arrow with care so that you do not break them, so that you will be able to pull it out more easily. And be careful not to break the arrow.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then let him stand there until the hair is cut; otherwise, turn him around, for extraction is a difficulty.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the extraction of blood makes him contrary, then introduce what we have said in our chapter about his medicine; and be careful with the incision of the nerve and the vein, and do not hold back on extracting the arrow, soon or late, firmly or gently; and arrange the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow came out, for that is the greatest help he can get, and if you cannot, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another place, or which does not open anything, or whose skin is swollen in one place, so that it can be seen or felt differently: then cut on top, as long as the tweezers can take hold of it, and then extract it: do it now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, so turn your hand roundly, as long as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, so let it rest for a while, and then begin the extraction again as long as it comes out; and if there is an arrow in it, so that you can squeeze all of it out; and if there is a splinter, and you see a little pain, administer an ointment, if you administer an instrument with a sharp point, so that the splinter enters into the hole of the instrument; and then push out, and if the splinter is chewed, so push the instrument at a sharp point entering, in order to make the extraction more bearable.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, so it is convenient that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is; if you can, then heal the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow enters you in the belly or bladder or chest, and it is close to the surface, then you may cover it, if you can; and beware of covering the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, for that is the work. And treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and this is how it should be done:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed twig is also like an owl's feather, to touch the tip of the arrow, as this is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tweezers for picking up and holding is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins from the neck common:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	XXXI veins from which one is cured are XVI, that is to say: II batans which are behind the ears, which are called "dous herbech"; and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and II veins which are in II wings of II hairs, which are called "aspires"; and the vein which is under the brow; and the vein which is at the head of the child; and the II girths which are at the throat; and the II veins which are above the lips, and these are the veins which are called "augeherich"; and the veins which are behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one is commonly cured are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the back, and is called by the lay people "vein of the head"; and its companion is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and is called by the lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic lies on the right side of the back, and is called by the lay people "vein of the belly", and is under the light skin, and is that from which one is cured, which opens obviously above the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the saving is the vein that is between the thumb and the index finger, and if there are II rains; and in the leg and where the foot is III veins: one is dislocated from the fold of the left side of the thigh, and the second that is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg are III veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And the saving is the vein that is between the thumb and the index finger, and if there are II rains; and in the leg and where the foot is III veins: one is dislocated from the fold of the left side of the thigh, and the second that is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg are III veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English: 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The medicine of the vein in the forehead is as useful as the medicine of the cephalica for the old diseases of the face, and for migraine and blindness. And its quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called a 'fosseur', whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let out blood as much as you see fit; then loose the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is well healed and never work again by a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the fire must not be too hot; and the vein is sewed across, because the bone is close by, and the fire might burst out when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The medicine of the two veins that are in the two limbs helps with scabies, and with migraine, and with blindness, and with the oil spot, and with the old diseases of the face; and its quality for their medicine is that the patient twists his neck without tying it, as we have said before; then bandage, and a little cross-縫ing with a small flame, because there is no need of a seamstress.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is a subtle flame, by chance let it break; then make run blood, as much as you need, and then lay on cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the blood from the vein flows rapidly, and suddenly, and diseases of the face, as much as migraines and seizures that come in the face, especially when they are old; and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strangles his neck, then strain his nose with your left hand, and take the subtle flame long, and put it between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and the flow will start now; and don't go too far in perfection, and make run blood according to your need, and then lay it a night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l'estrecement de l'alainne, et a l'encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l'une et l'autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine du lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l'autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n'estrangle; et le laisse jusc'au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.
de la sainie des leivres	the health of animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips: they help to prevent colds in the mouth, dental decay, and cuts on the lips, and the birth of teeth and their growth.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this remedy is to have the patient sit before you, and hold his/her neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one on the right and the other on the left, and know them by their being dark, and also by their being small: so cut off both, and if you don't know them, and are in doubt, then cut off the larger of the two, and do the same to the veins above and below, for it is a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	The health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly treated are done so according to two methods: either by piercing them with a sharp, wide blade, or by carving them out with an olive-sized, fine blade; and they are large and small according to the width and depth of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is wide when it is known as such, and is large when you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins that are thick with visible blood, and that contain thick blood and tumult; and this is the shape of the flame of olive size.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more finely pointed, and is for treating fine veins, where there is fine blood that is yellow in color.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment for a basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments in the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the healer to treat it thoroughly, and to bind the artery that is above it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it copes with the earth, and the course of blood comes, if the coining is stopped, as I have said; and should not be seized by fire, but cut off like sheep.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the base does not open clearly, if you extract it and change it for another; or do you want any rain from him, or treat his vein at the end of his arm: it opens clearly; and the coping is done with fire, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the site of the injury clearly, so that you extract the arm, and touch the site until you feel the pulse; then mark the site of the wound, and then lay hold of the arm, and cope the vein with fire; and watch that you do not hurt in the artery when you see the site of the injury, for it is from the artery: therefore avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: then hurry and place your finger on it longwise, then lift your finger so that the blood stops flowing, for this happens many times; then tie the limb, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood does not stop flowing and it flows out, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery because the head of the shoulder is retained; stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig wood, and split it, and take one half and bind it tightly to the other tomorrow; if it stops bleeding, it is good; but if not, then apply the powder that stops blood, as we have said, to several positions for the small hole of the wound, and to the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtilitat, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And the treatment for the cephalic vein is to tie it with fire from the olive or marten flame, for it is the safest of all veins, since it has no nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	All the same, it is best to seek out the lighter way, and do nothing if it fails the first time, and try again; and perhaps, in some men, the ways will grow larger, if it fails the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about healing is that healing should be undertaken only for the purpose of maintaining health and preventing future diseases; and it should be done in one of the three positions, namely: cerebral, facial, and basilar. Healing should be undertaken at the beginning of a fast, in autumn or winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and healing should be started on the first day or third day after two or three hours have passed.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n'a point d'oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc'a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc'a septime.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The patient who is free of disease has no definite limit, but when fasting or eating, at all hours and in all seasons; nor should physicians treat children under the age of XIIII years, nor women after giving birth for only four months up to seven months. Nor should old people over the age of LX years be treated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	When treating a patient, in any way, it is necessary to determine that there is no obstruction in the intestines of a light enema, if there has been a retention of stool, so that the veins do not attract the excess waste that is harmful to the main organs; nor should one treat someone who is too ill from meat, or alcohol, as long as it lasts, nor those who are dry due to sickness; and if one wants to treat after a colic passion, vomiting, stomach cramping, excessive sexual activity, heavy labor, staying up late, fasting, or drinking, or taking medicines, then do so with caution; then bath or swimming, if it does not harm them, for the subtle humors of the body, and let him gain weight, through food, drinks, and medicines, if necessary; then between bath or swim, because the heat subtilely affects the blood, and treat from the third day, as we have said; and avoid work, drinking, luxury, and similar things; be quiet and calm, and let the healer be higher than the one who treats, and rub his arms twice or three times, then stretch the vein gently, because if it is too constricted or tight, it cannot move; and then rub the patient's skin with his left hand in the area of the vein that needs to be stretched, a little at a time, so that the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the healer's hand with the flame of a small bowl of old oil, and place his right hand on the patient's skin where the vein needs to be stretched, so that the vein does not hurt or cause pain.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run as cords along the body, and some of these are prone to windiness; so when placed on fire, if removed from fire, they cannot be opened, and so are those; and if the vein is opened, too much pressure must be applied, for the surgeon must be cautious about such matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, that is good; but if not, let it be done again a little later in a place of healing or in bed, if the veins are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are swollen, and the patient hopes for it, let him rest a day or two, and do not tie the arm: perhaps it will come to naught; but if you doubt that it may not hurt as much as you see, then set fire to the whole limb properly; and work at the wound with care, so that the veins are not injured, for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the wound bleeding, do not recommend any medicine, and put a little oil on it, because it heals the wound quickly, and is soft in this place where the oil is; and thus administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins for stopping the flow of blood; and that one does also make three times as hard and bent when put on the wound; but too much subdue it, if it becomes too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there is a large abscess that often occurs, most especially when the opening of the vein is small, you must hurry and put a wet sponge on the wound and bind it tight for an hour; and it is good that after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains at the place for several days without turning black or green, then do not worry about it; and if you see it, put some aloe or mirrremade with calament juice, monstere, or similar on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance happen in the hand of the patient under pressure from his hand; therefore put your hand on it, and if you find the soft place under pressure from your hand, then that is the appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then know that you do not put anything on what we have said, for perhaps in the cort there is no artery; but he makes it dry to harden the place, then he cures it with other remedies, until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And each person takes the blood according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if his blood is black, so let it out until it is red; and if you see him fat, so let it out until it is thin; and if he is too hot, so let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for him who is thin and out of shape, and has the need to extract blood, that he make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him to heal little by little, and let him heal by cutting across, not by piercing; and this method of healing is saved from the corruption of blood and the tangling of nerves, and is better than the healing of the long, large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose hearts are in need of healing, it is appropriate to give moist bread made with grape juice; if it is heated, it should be eaten three or four times a day. And if the person's complexion is cold, then before eating the moist bread, it should be dipped in muscatel syrup or in honey syrup with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and caraway, and in sweet-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they have a fever at the beginning of their sickness, after drinking three or four glasses of water, it is appropriate that they drink a broth and muscatel syrup, and aromatic syrup made with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and caraway, and sweet-smelling syrups, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on the treatment of syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they vomit up food and then eat again later on, but are weakened by great sickness, that they be healed little by little according to the quantity of its continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to vomit his arms after the first saigne, and he has a strong heart, so he saignes seven hours after the first saigne, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to bleed from another place, should bleed the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has blood within the body that is already warmed up, and causes fever; so, when a large quantity comes out, and widens the opening so much that it sounds like a bell; then you should adjust all conditions of bleeding, and put your hand on his pulse when he bleeds, so that death does not come from the opening, and this happens many times, when the bleeding is neglected; and you must not untie the arm, and make the blood come out again, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly on it; nor if it is bent, let it extend the arm generously, for that would be bad; but leave it until it bleeds the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is frozen at the opening of the vein comes out, and put a little rope soaked in water on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is still bleeding, let it be and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is subsiding.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires that the blood be drained a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is cut from the arm at the base of the wrist; for this is a composed vein.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of the cut is such that the patient holds his hand in hot water until it becomes red; then let it be moved gently, so that the vein appears clearly, then cut it across, not wide nor long; and if it should be torn, and the cut be near the joint of the hand, do not put it back into the hot water again, for we put it back more in haste than in rest; and this cut from this vein is more secure than all other veins, for it neither hurts the artery nor the nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for the right hand's salve is to all liver diseases, and this is how: draw out the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein is gone, if you can see it; and then, if you cut across it, do not harm anything completely; and do not cut too much completely, because the nerves are all exposed; then put back the hand in hot water; if it has frozen into the wound, it cannot be pulled out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if it is necessary to put oil and thread on it to join it firmly together, do so with each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do all the same as I have told you above for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The doctor treats the disease of the spine by applying fire to it; as for the disease of the leg, he applies fire to it and burns it, and does not leave a scar. The disease of the leg may be treated by a hot iron if there is no pain or swelling. Fire is used to treat a broken bone that is out of place and causing pain.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	The quality of the doctor's treatment is that the patient should dip his foot in hot water and rub it on the vein until it stops hurting, and put it on the joint of the foot; and if the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go more rains; heal wherever there is a larger rain, or at the ankle, that must be used.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are out of place, and treat it across as well as down; and let the flames not go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get out of it, put the foot into water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if he is injured for the first time, then start the second time above a little, because the leg is salty; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and in this way make the sound of the other leg even.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic vein is at the ankle and its injury deserves the pain of the thigh when it is for a wound.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this injury is that the patient goes into or out of the bath, and draws it up from the ankle with four twists, because otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and go through it; and cut it more than you do, for the leg is swollen, and it is very relented.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't let him go out in the rain or in the sun, and towards the small two, and protect yourself from the wind; and make the blood run until you see it, and then remove the bandage, and put cotton on it and tie it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Healing with suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Are made of horns, or of air, or of glass; and ventilation is done according to two ways: by injuring and drawing blood, or without injuring.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventilation that does not hurt is done in 12 ways of the body: one at the top of the head; and another at the back; and another along both sides of the neck; and another at the mouth; and another at the two arms; and another at the two legs; and another at the two feet; and ventilation does not treat blood except for small veins that are scattered in the chest, and therefore it does not hurt anyone, neither by hot nor cold, in any illness that comes from excess unless all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if because of the necessity of sickness one must ventose, or by habit, if we administer it every hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each ten; for there are such who, when they have to ventose, become very heavy; and those who come out with a swollen face, and with a swollen head, and with a swollen neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who come out with a drop of blood in their mouth, and have slipped the tongue, and thirst for blood; and if there are those who dream, and see by lack of blood and navel and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and in particular when it is mid-month, we order them to ventose after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The surgeon of the museum helped in the headache of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and should not come until the whole body has been evacuated; and this ventosis is in the place of the headache of the cephalic, and should not come except for those of a cold complexion who are using or have had a fever, because it does them great harm; and for this one should not come at night when using, nor those who have a cold head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often from it, if they become dizzy, and because of this, the suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And the suction should be placed in the neck area where the pain is located and where the windpipe and larynx are, and because of this, it can help with strangle throat, a cut in the trachea, and nausea and stomach upset; but it should be pressed lightly, for if it is pressed too hard, it may cause dizziness or upset the stomach.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And the suction should be placed in the neck area where the pain is located and where the windpipe and larynx are, and because of this, it can help with strangle throat, a cut in the trachea, and nausea and stomach upset; but it should be pressed lightly, for if it is pressed too hard, it may cause dizziness or upset the stomach. Tell the patient to express their hand so that they don't crush the artery and prevent the flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings of the mouth cause disease of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is at the level of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the arms cause as much pain as three veins in the arms, because they hurt a lot; and instruct the patient that he not make too much noise, because the bones are naked and there are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The windings that are on the back cause hemorrhoids at the fundament, and similar diseases, and it is necessary that the winding be big and of iron, so that it can well milk; and by chance, if it were too subtle, it would break, and would make big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Legs' suction cups if they open up wide, for they draw blood from all the body, and are like the old pains of the rain, and of the mare, and of the bladder, and make flowers come back; and they are in the place of the two sophenes, and of the two feet, but nevertheless they weaken the body after a long time, and cause death in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method for applying the suction cups to the legs is that you put them first where they are open, and suck them quickly, and place them firmly, and move them evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then go on, and remove the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are some who have very tender skin, and clear pores: so it is necessary to wound them once only, and to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the man is fat outside, he should be struck twice: once to soften the path of the blood that is thick.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the man is very fat, he should be struck three times; and when we want to squeeze out blood little by little, we should press only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw blood, we should do so frequently; and if the man is fat, he should be struck thoroughly, and the ends should be such that the wound be suddenly seen, and cover with oil of mint, or of sweet almonds, or of pumpkin seed, and if it is in summer, with oil of watercress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the man's surplus is thick and cold, take oil of bitter almonds, or of balsamite, or oil of fennel, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if to someone who has a sore that is tender and full of pus, there is no need to put oil on it, but it needs to be washed after the rise of the rose water, or cold water, or morel water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if one has moisture, if it rises so, or with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And if one has large superfluity, they rise with old wine, or with water of oak, or with a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar; and it is not necessary to clean with the vacuum before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and they should not fall asleep after the vacuum, but when they need to vacuum, as soon as they are vacuumed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are healing are coleric, and the sun is too sharp and inflamed; so it is necessary that he take cold things, as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with the ashes, and similar things; and little fish, and cart of char, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and little fish, and cart of char, and moist meats. And the day that he is windblown, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give certain men three times or musk before or after ventosation, to strengthen the main members; and make the sun subtile, but it is not necessary to drink it if he is hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The ventilations that do not hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagre, and on the belly and the boughs and the rains and the hunchback, because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the outsides, and it is only done to attract blood from one member to another, as when we put ventilations on the breasts when the sick person is not well; to remove the viscous substance that is in the member, as when we put ventilations on the belly and the boughs to weaken the member; and to remove the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, so it removes the operation, or deserts the stone from its place; and thus it is done when one puts them on the liver and on the mouse when there is retained ventosity, and these ventilations are empty, minished only for sucking so much; and they are never combined together again, nor plainness of fresh water, as in the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way that the ventilation is filled with hot water or water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup, administered to fire thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should be two inches wide and half a palm in circumference, and have a small hole in the center about the size of a needle, so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the limb; and in the middle a rod of wood or iron, for a grip, and there are large and small ones depending on the disease and age of those who take them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And it should be placed on the limb like this: take the grip of wax or thread, and put it in the middle of the suction cup over the rod that is in the middle of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and the two are on the hole that we have said, so that when you remove it, the vapor comes out, and then take off the suction cup; and take the grip again as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is used to treat pleurisy, there is no water, no fork or piercing, and it is only useful when it is dry, and is placed on the limb with a slight force; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	The suction cups that are used to treat pleurisy have no water, no fork or piercing, and they are only useful when they are dry, and are placed on the limb with a slight force; and this is the form: Suction cups should be used only for small limbs, like lips and gums, and similar things; and in the case of a horse's jaw, if it is necessary to use them, then they should be placed in sweet water, until they are free of wind and clear; and then, if it is possible to put suction cups on the jaw, they should be put there, because this is better afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, raise the joint, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the joint is very sore after the heart of the veins, so wet a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the vein is blocked; and if the veins are many, put on vitriolic powder, or gall, and similar things, until they are blocked; or you put half a handful of peeled peas on the joint, and let them sit until they burn into the joint, so they will now block; and if you need to do more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the veins do not want to come together, then rub the joint with fresh blood, or you put an needle in it as long as a vein comes out of it, and then put them on, and sometimes when they feel the blood, they burn; and when you see that they are peeing, then sprinkle on a little powder of aloes and sepalum, or of ash, so they will now pee.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The art of chemistry is often necessary in the practice of medicine, and is useful for the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know then, dear son, that the wise men have poured this chemistry over, which has never been found in any of the old books or letters; and for this reason the science is strange to our land, for I never found any good one; and I know nothing except what I learned from the study of the old books, and by experience, and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have condensed it into a summary form at the end, and have clearly set forth the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore fitting that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and pause on truthfulness so that those who test it know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when there is a fracture or dislocation or twist or break in anyone, it is fitting that you hurry to save the sick person on both sides, if no harm has befallen him, i.e. if he is not weak of heart, or old; or if his bones are not too thin, or too often broken; and do not drink too much cold juice, nor eat any fat foods, and do not fill yourself with too much meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the temperature of the appendix, nor the expansion of matter in the limb; then bring back the disease to its first government which it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with meat which is fat, or with viscosity, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and testicles, and pies, and eggs of fish, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a slow nutrition will delay the healing of the fracture and hasten it more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of old and decrepit people can not well heal or knit together according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children; but rather cure them with great fat meat which hardens and joins the limb together, as much as it will, and then stop eating it all, and for this purpose it is necessary to feed on large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is different from the break of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another by cutting, so as to form the shape of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that makes a small slit.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each kind is its tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes in place; and it is known the break of the bone by what the turn is crooked, and open well by the side, and a bit on the presser of the hand; and when there is no twisting or breaking, and the patient does not feel much pain, it is not because there is no break, but it may have twisting, or a slit, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it by hand, but put medicine on it that comes here later, and then now hold it gently in place.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that comes in the arm, and there are two parts separated, now put them to be even, so that an abscess is born and a scar comes out, if you leave it for a day, as long as the abscess is calmed down; then he puts it evenly on the muscle that you can move easily and carefully, and know that the restoration of him is easier than the restoration of the one who has pieces; then hold it in place, just as it is written later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces of bone in the hand or foot, or in a small member, or in two cords, or in one cord and in your hand; put the member back in its natural position, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you remove all additions to their places at the muscle that you can move it, and keep from your work so that no damage or pain comes to the patient; and fit the two bones well according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel the pulse well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the dressing is done well, and do not squeeze it too much, do not press it as those who make it come by their work heat and contraction of the member do, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, teach the patient that he not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, turning or in any other way; and guard well that the member be so secure that he feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and the position in which you put it should not cause him any pain; and be careful that it is put correctly, so that there is no twistedness when he is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken member are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arm and leg and other parts: it is convenient to wrap linens of linen and fine fabric; and those that are large, such as thigh and calf: it is convenient to wrap with a broad and sturdy linen, for the broad linings embrace all the large member and hold it tight on all sides so that there is no gap; then remove light stitches, three or four times according to the member, and hold a hand on all the lining, then go up over the break and hold it less, so that the break moves a little; and soften the lining a little and a little, until you press most of the blood from the place of injury, then take another lining, and turn it again over the injured part; then return to the other side of the break, and hold it gently, not too hard or too gently, as we have said in the first line of thread above; then put the linings between the linen or cloth stitches, so that they are all equal, then tie them all together on top of the bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or abscess, place over it a warm compress, and let it rest in this way for some days; then draw up onto your fingers, and be of half a length of a wide cane treated with salt, or of a twig from which one makes cleats, or of palms, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And the stake that one puts over the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and be also as far away from the member as it is necessary in size or length; then draw up onto the stakes as you did at first, then tie it together, like you did with the first stake; the smaller it is, the better; and the thread should be fine, not too thick or too thin, and made of linen; for if the thread is thick, like those foolish people who make their ligatures out of linement rope, it is a great mistake, because the ligature will not be equal if it is too thin, and it only deserves to be less than two inches between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pregnant by the legs of the stars after extraction in her healthy days, then let them be covered with linen, or another rag, so that they do not scar.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breach, and the cure is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suit to extract stars from all the members the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it does not suit to put stars before five or seven days, or more according to the urgency of the abscess; and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and that you take flour which sticks to the walls of the mill, and confound it with much egg, and put this confection, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and that is the common way of the plasterer restoring fracture in many conditions, and most of all in women and small children, for it is not suitable to be too soft or too hard.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Other ways to make plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take aloes and myrrh and nettle and asafetida and arabic gum and mugwort, 10; mirth andaloes, 5; alchemi, 8; and make a powder of them, and mix it with sheep's dung; the mixture should be warm, for it is good composition, and will quickly restore broken bones, and is useful to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to make plaster for healing twists: take mugwort and castor oil, 10; myrrh and aloes, 7; acacia, 6; and bolete armenia, 10; grind them well, and mix with sharp or sheep's dung, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to make plaster for joints and bones that have come out of place, to soothe the pain immediately, and to treat fractures: take fresh lamb's skin, and soak it in warm water and cooked oil, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	It is good for soothing an abscess, and properly taking away the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making an ointment to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth hazel leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of making an ointment for healing broken bones and reducing the inflammation of an abscess: take dried leaves of the fig tree and earth hazel leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violets, flour of vetches, a part of each; grind them and confer with wine, and heat the members, and confer with water or vinegar, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of making an ointment that is more powerful than the first method, to be used when a persistent abscess develops before healing the broken bone.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mullein, and seed of flax, thistle, meadwort, and fennel, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part or the other; and grind, and confect with vinegar of salt, or with sweet vinegar, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book he says that one should not put anything on a broken limb for healing except wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to me that one should put on a broken limb things dry and slightly warm, such as mirr and allspice and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plasters for lesions and pain: take sheep's wool, or goose feathers, and mullein, and yarn of even length, and grind them, and make a plaster with it, and apply it to the member.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does his bone move from its place; but if pain comes to its place, or itching, lack of rest, or swelling, you are in a hurry, and loosen it, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge moist with sea water, and dip into the water, and raise the member up, until the itching stops, and the pain is calmed down; then let the member rest for an hour, and then put on another dry one, wet it with water or oil and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm; and ease the inflammation of the member, and calm the pain, and then begin again with the gentle application, and a little bit of plaster, and do not tighten it as much as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and swollen and painful and inflamed throughout, and you need to use plaster and binding, if it worsens, as you did at first, with equal care.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb at all as we have said, if it is not bound up after three days or four or five or seven; and never leaves it more than 20 days, according to what can be seen, until the break comes and approaches the joint of the wood; then restrain it more than before, and make its flesh grow thicker, as I have said before; and if you see that it is drying up more than is necessary, then immediately pour hot water on it, every time you release it, and let it be for each third day, and wash a little of the lye; by this work therefore restrain the swelling to the limb, and carefully break down what has been misaligned: this is bad, and if it is painful and fearful ovraiges, and I do not see anything else that can make it stronger and bring it straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various methods of breaking.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many different ways to break it, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct; for there is a break that is made from the impact of an axe, and the collar bone is all the way down to the bone, so as to have made one like this; and this way of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	For the spear breaks the bone from above without piercing it, and this way of breaking is called "absolue"; and the wound caused by these two great breaks or a small one.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a break due to an axe head, or a sword cut, or a collar bone from stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating break, which approaches the skin but does not go through it, or which is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that has entered the bone is as fine as a hair, and for this reason is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by a stone, or by a blow, or by a similar thing, and enters the bone, and the hole is as big as a hair, just as the blacksmith does when he hammers on the bellows; then it goes into the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if there is more moisture under the cheekbone, so that it becomes soft like a child's; and there are all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are made from, just as they are made from stapes; and I will speak about their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the investigation at tents, and by the cart corrupted that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is made by what when one has discovered the bone, and frots it up, if so opens the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, take care as to the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, palmations, feverish ague, and the hair coming out and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, so cannot he healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and expect salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourth day at most that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue that covers the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the skull, so it is necessary that you split the damaged part inwardly; and it is necessary that you press the chief on the patient's head, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and if the blood comes out at the uncovering of the bone or abscess, help him with what is appropriate, and it is necessary that you fill the place with wet towels soaked in oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be sure about the blood coming out; then begin to split the bone, and this is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you split the narrow end first, and that is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I another way more big than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of different taillemens, some are narrow and others are wide, and are pointed, and are made of iron; and work lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, then it is necessary that you pierce it through, so that taillemens with barres do not completely go through the bone, but leave a margin or circle above the tip that does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes in its place at the end of the bone, so that you have barres for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of making barres:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce through the bone is that you put the barres on top of the bone, and turn it back with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been pierced; then remove the barres a little further away, and do this everywhere, then cut off the space of the bone that is between the knots, and do this more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you hold the bone in your hand, or at any of the instruments that you have like pliers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the skull nor the sinews.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have broken the bone and treated it, if you see that you have retained the sharpness of the bone which is distant from all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it should be softer and more delicate than the other incisor; and if it does not retain any small bones or scales, if it has bent slightly on the tools; then cure the wound with the things we mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working which is that of Galen who is more skillful; and work it very hard, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, at which the break is open; so that when you have discovered this part, you shall place the point of this lens-shaped incisor there, from whence it comes:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the part is wet on II sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then pound it lightly with a small mallet all around, and take good care of the piece which is coming off; if it is bent on the bone, then bend the bone lightly, for to break the bone well is not without danger, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce just to the membrane, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, so cover again that sharpness, and remove the scales with a fine razor whose you must have different quantities, to regulate in each place the most appropriate, according to the work and the form of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have a lot of small razors, and then more fine ones, and do not cease to do this as long as it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you regulate according to their alignment; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered to those who have put their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the silk is open, you should take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and oil it, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled up in II or III, and oil it with wine and oil, and put it over the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not hurt the silk, then cover it up for a day or two, until the abscesses are calmed down, then remove it, and administer medicines as roots, and flour of times, and incense powder, and herbal substances; and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines that do not sting; and guard so that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave the infection, nor let bowels gather above the membrane, for when the bowels gather over the silk of the skull, if they corrode and perforate, they cause great harm to the patient; because when you put something mordant on the silk, if it seeps through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Guard against, therefore, any bad accident coming to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackening does not come but only because of the medicine that has been put on it, which has its virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glues one cloth, and lay it on the wound; then treat with the methods that seem right to you until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	I tell you that neither of the two bones above it are ever broken if one is separated from the other, for they are two: and that bone is cartilaginous and does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	If one of the two bones is broken, then you should push your little finger or pin from the nose on that bone, and make it equal to the length of your index finger, and slightly bend it from side to side until the bone regains its natural shape; do this lightly, and guard against the patient feeling pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, you shall believe that you put it even with the head of a rod not too thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, do so then, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess is calmed down, then bind at the neck with linen bands, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another on the other side, if it is a fracture; and may the bands be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And do not say that one should moisten the bandages every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that the bandages be wet with oil of olive and powder of molybdenum; then leave the bandage on, until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And there is no need to put goose feathers in the tent, and if it has an inner cover, keep it closed, and let the air out, and let the disease spread among them; or do as I have said.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes out while you are operating, put cotton wet with oil or a string of cotton wool soaked in oil, or a small piece of linen string.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come out, put plaster on it from afar, made of flours of barley and incense powdered with honey, then put light cloths on it, and do not bind the tent; and if the break in the tent is small and it breaks into small pieces, extract them with appropriate tools, then cut off the break, and heal things that have been damaged by water, and always, as for plasters and ointments appropriate to it; and if there is no sore inside the tent, heal the tent, and put sheepskin on it, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not broken in two, but is bent inward, so that it looks like a hook, then one should carefully adjust it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should put your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side, put your index finger of the right hand inside, gently pushing it back into place, and make it even with the left hand from the outside.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is in two places, you should carefully adjust it with two extensions, making them even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement is painful, or there is a rupture, then put on the broken jaw a thread of gold, silver, or silk; and put over it two double towels; and put over one a large, well-made plate, or a piece of even leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it tightly with the string, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure is changing, let it rest for three days and then put back what has been changed; and apply plaster, of flour from the mill with a lot of eggs or flour of sesame, after having removed the cerote; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster starts to dry, and the condition of the patient does not change, let it rest as long as it is healthy; often it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come out, so treat them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take a piece of the bone off; if subtle of the osteotomy are the tools suitable for it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, so widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have osteotomies all these pieces, and there is no delay at all, if the wound is wide, put on it I with a suitable plaster to prevent infection, until he is healthy.
de la forcele	Of the fire
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	For the fire forceps break many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to III manners: or it is broken and dislocated in II, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the ovraiges is when the break is without wound, that you have II ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the fire break; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make equal the break on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair loss.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	Et s'il a besoin de plus grand soulagement, alors mets une sphère ronde de tissu, ou de laine, sur l'épaule du patient ; ou soit grande selon sa nécessité; et tenez-la fermement, et tirez la sphère à votre main, afin que vous mettiez le désordre égal, comme il convient.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out at the shoulder, so that it comes off perfectly, then it is convenient for the patient to lie down on his side; and put the shoulder out at a slant, and lift up the members with a lever, as much as the bone of the arm will come up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then put the break at your sides, and if you find it too difficult, then split it with a saw; and pull the pieces out lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then take off the tool that you have to one of the incisions, but keep the device on the bone:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and appears like a spoon, and is not a hair, and is also wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and there are two heads, just as you see, one wide and the other small, which corresponds to the rupture of the wound that you made when you fractured the bone; and when you are sure of the warm, if a little wound, and the rupture is small, or if you doubt about it, then cover the wound with cloth and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if warm comes, then wet it with oil and vinegar and wine and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if warm comes, then wet it with oil and vinegar and wine and put on it. For the extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no rupture, do this: Put powder from the mill and ashes of eggshells on the bone, and lightly pack it, and fasten a spittle around the joint, if you need to; then take a very long bandage about a palm wide, and wrap it twice around the packs, and wrap the powder; then take a thin stake three fingers wide and long, and wrap it tightly around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the stake on top of the break, and fasten the stake to the joint; and loosen and tighten it every day, and when you see that the bandage holds well, and you can clearly see that the stake does not move around the bone, then leave it alone for a week or more; and then start wrapping again if you think it is necessary, and fasten it and let it be; and it will be healed in about 28 days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	For if the shoulder dislocates and is out of place, and does not move by itself; then adjust it according to its shape and return it to its natural position in all ways that you can; then put on powder from the mill with lots of flour, and light dustings, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, and loosen the board at the edges of the shoulder, so work it with linen thread, so that the board lies evenly; and then tighten it firmly so that the board does not move from its place, and check it every day; and whenever it moves, tighten it again, and make the board even if it has come out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is put back in XX days or xxv, and when this number is complete, then loosen it, and be sure, for it is not bone that comes out easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone projects forward, and does not open the cure, if it is done above, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the joint to calm an abscess with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The leg is never broken in the middle, but this happens sometimes; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the joint, and feels great pain, and there is no relief, and sometimes it vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and you put a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly place it evenly in all ways as you can, so that the shape of the bone is like this; then wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return it to its natural position on the back, and hold it firmly, and release it every hour, and if it relaxes, then hold it again; and if it needs to be released, because of corrosion or itchiness that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, do it quickly, and release it, and remove the covering, and treat it in a manner of cure; then remove the covering, and hold it firmly until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the rib fracture does not come from above but from within, and it hurts more towards the end near the spine, and it feels good when it is stretched.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you make it even, then restore it as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and tie it with a bandage, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is turning inwards, then the patient feels great pain and a kind of burning, because the bone rubs against the skin; it makes him weak and he starts to vomit a lot of blood, and this is very bad for health, and the old ones suffer greatly.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if these people whose job it is to administer meat that swells the belly, so that the fracture goes away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, except that the warm blood comes out if it has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let the sound come.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we should put leeches on the place, to suck out the excess, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the leeches will not attract the excesses to the place of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the place with another moist thing in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space even, then let it be cured of the plague, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that hits the tent, then there is doubt in the patient, so one should split the bone under the torn rib, and put a tool to keep it from moving; and then one must cut the two ends of the wound, if it is big, and cure it with poultices until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses come to head, so cover them with oil and put on poultices; and cure while the head of that which it concerns to an abscess, and let rest there where it is, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break from the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes that breaks the bones of the neck, and it has not happened before; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to someone, and you do not know if he will be healed or not, take care that his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you poke them with a needle, then feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if he does not move and feels well when he is stretched out, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the disease is cured, if one applies the cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you can tell whether it is healthy or not, pay attention to whether the toes are softened, and to the accident that has happened there, and on the back there is a feeling of wind and excretion without wanting; and when it is soothed on his belly, if there is no feeling of excretion without wanting.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is soothed on his back and he tries to move, he can't.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is fatal: do not bother with its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come from anywhere, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess, oil or beef suet on the spine so that it is calmed down; then put on one of the plasters that comfort and dry, and tie it with a string, and order the patient to rest; and don't sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Et si certains os se désarticulent, couvrez-les avec du lambeau de peau; then break the bone, and join the two lips of the wound together, if it is large, with a stitch, then dress it with ointment, including char, until it is healthy; and if the joint of the bone is broken, which is called "the joint of the cow", then squeeze your pouche with your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand above the injury, then apply the plaster and the bandage, if you need to; then bind it up, and if there are any bones that have come loose, fasten them back in place, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, let there be only a small reduction at the top; then smooth it down, and set it in place at the edge of the parridge, and bring the patient pain and swelling at the site of the break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting-to, is that you hold your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know what this break is and its form; and if the break is at the top joint, then make this break equal, as long as it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it leans inward, then let the patient sit with his back upright, as long as the setting-to of this break has been arranged for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, then put plaster on it, and then tie it with a string or a cord, and hold the break tight so that it does not move; and fit the joint with strips of cloth, as long as the place is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And order the patient to sleep on his back or side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess develops, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calm, and put that which we have just said before; and then return to the setting-to, and hold it tight as needed, unless there is some bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	of the dislocation of the shoulder is what lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then we restore it according to one of the two ways: one is that you take a long piece of wood, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And make two knots in the two ends, and stretch it well up, and cut the patient on a bench; then place the broken end of the arm on a long piece of wood, so that it comes to rest on the palm of the hand, and have another person hold a beam of wood behind it, then lift it up with one end resting on the palm of the hand, and put the broken end on an even surface; then make the two ends of the arm even with each other, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you tie the patient to his bed, and bind his hand to his neck, then order the ministers that one hold what is on the break to his hand, and the others stretch out all his limbs to their parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is stronger, then hold the patient's hand away from the break, and over the break, and extend each of the ministers to his side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the shoulder blade, then you must put the patient' hand away from the break, and over the break; and likewise, if the break is on one side of the neck, you must put the hand on the other side; and likewise, if the break is on one side of the neck, you must put it lightly, without effort, as long as the break is even on top and on the neck; then make the break even, if necessary, and hold it in place, because there will be no pain.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscess breaks, do not hold it back for more than seven days, and put a wet cloth on the break, then dry it; then hold it in place, and the way you hold it in place is that you put plasters on the break, then tie the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest; and wrap the bandage around, and hold it in place over the shoulder, and over the arm, so that the arm is straight, unless something is holding it back, or if the bone is broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the nose does not move, use a lever, and put on the fracture a more wide and stronger lever than the others, and leave between each lever II degrees of space, and let each lever be so large that it passes III degrees of space on each side; then pull up with the levers, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the fracture, more strongly and less by removing.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the levers and the pulling up, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the ache of the aposteme, let it be bound until seven days, as we have said; then watch each of the III days for itching that does not grow or come to the place where it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If this treatment does not work, if no such accident happens within three days or more, and the patient sleeps on their back, with their hands on their stomach; then tie the shoulder with one cotton sock of equal thickness, and check every hour during the day or night, that the shape of the limb does not move, or that the ligaments are not relaxed; if it responds to the power of medicine, and gives them the food which we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at the first layer of substance; and when they begin to improve, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset after forty days of everything; and then they should be removed and given baths and medications to treat them effectively.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if it is stiff and encrusted, it will take days or months to loosen it.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one small and one large; the small one lies next to the elbow, and the large one is above it; perhaps the large foscile breaks by itself, or the small one, or perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the healing is easy and swift; and when the large one is broken, the healing is difficult and painful, more so than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small foscile is broken, then it is sufficient to extend it slightly and to make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large foscile that is broken, then it must be stretched more strongly; and extend it on one knee, and turn the hand up higher than the other limbs, and the small fingers down lower than the other fingers, and so the patient crosses his arm across himself in the middle, and the knee before him higher than the hand, that the patient feels no pain; then extend the minister's arms to the dislocated part at his hand, or at the elbow, and another minister's arms at the other side above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then make the mirror even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are any broken pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is one that does not fit, and you cannot put it back in its place, then do so on top of the bone, as we have said above.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is a wound with the breakage, I will speak about it in the single chapter of the antidote; then take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if there is an obstacle to the restoration [of the bone] come the abscesses, then cover them with a cloth made of oil rosin and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and I cover them from above very gently, until the abscesses are calm.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then cover the bone with cerot, and I put on the plaster of the powder from the mill with a lot of ash, because I put the splints, and it is that the splint of the breakage is closer to the top, and one more piece larger than the others; and know that there should be six splints or arms in several dispositions: whether the breakage is in one bone or in two; and drag them up above the breakage more than anywhere else, and always less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the antidote; and may the cloth that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not too hard nor too rough; and may the thread, from which it is dragged, be made of linen, not too thick nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And let the limb and the ligature rest for a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you soak the limb in hot water until this itch is relieved; and let the limb rest without being restricted.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then begin the extraction again, and if the ligature is relaxed and the bone is exposed, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the joint can no longer be moved due to its being too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit, and leave it like that for several days until the movement returns, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the disease, then loosen the limb up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or let him sit, then put his hands on his neck, and make his neck even, and keep away from movement and turning, and sleep on his back; and know that this broken one is healed in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and to us there are few breaks, and only sometimes comes a little pain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or painful, so that the patient feels a sharp pain and sits upright correctly even; then let him put his hand on an extended towel, and spread out the broken bones, and make them even by force, and put the plaster and staples, if any abscesses come, then put a staff according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in I linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks in the paregore between the belly of the plant, so make a rope of drapels, and command the patient that he estranges to his broken plant; and then he draws out with a long rope, and is its stele of both sides as much as the plant of the hand, and draws, if it comes.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks on the side, so that you put a stake above, and another behind in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and seal the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of the two sides, if it's a puncture wound, then make it even, as it comes; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that you have to put a small straight stake to lift the break, so that it doesn't move; and if the break is on both sides, as in the index or one of the others, then make it even, and tie the two healthy ones together; or you tie them all together, making sure not to hurt, or you put a stake up, as though you were going to hang yourself; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of an abscess, and help whoever comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the chest bruise
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The rib bones of the chest are often bruised, and we can clearly see when they turn forward and backward; and restoration is made so that it is tied above the broken bone, and another is fixed.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister their bond to its equal part; and this is when the broken bone is inserted into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the chest, then one of the bonds extends to the hand's back, and another fixed bond fixes the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee, then one of the bonds extends to the back of the knee, and another bond fixes the break downward; then put the binder on the bone according to its natural shape, and then place the plaster, and the bandage, for this does not come easily.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, if he leaves it calm then returns to your work and your treatment; the time is right in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, wrap it in a dry cloth tightly doubled up II or III times, and leave the excess, then return the leg as far as the heel comes to the root of the ankle, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, loosing the knee joint, and let the head of the thread come up; then return to the leg and to the thigh with the bandage, then put on stakes, and put a stake on the bone of the leg; then employ the fire viciously between the leg and the thigh of drapelsou to make equal the extraction, then begin to tie III twists or IIII around the bruise; and as you go up more on the bruise, and less extract; then place II stakes that are above that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and in lier III stakes that are over, then return to the joint at the head of the thread, until you come up from the foot; and the extraction, if it does not move from its place, then let it be, then, if there is no abscess or swelling or other symptom.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to dislocation, and addresses who comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold, so far as possible; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place, and to draw it strongly; and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the loin wounded in this way, as when the shoulder or arm is wounded; however, in this restoration made it does not harm the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the loin is restored in two days, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the leg from the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	know that in the leg from the knee there is little fracture, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is a split or a fracture, and has come to all pain, and there is no pain, and this feels wrong.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et li restauration si est c'on mette igal ceu qui est rons à ses dois, tant qu'il soit assemblez mues c'on puet; puis met l'emplaistre, et i met une estele reonde, s'tu en as mestier, et l'estraint si com il convenit, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met à chescun accident ceu k'il convenit, tant qu'il soit sanez.
de la brisure de la jambe	And the restoration is that you make even that which is twisted in two, as much as it will hold together; then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage on it, if you need one, and tighten it as it should be tightened, then apply all the provisions that we have said in other breakers, such as hot poultices and others like them; also apply to each accident what suits it, until it is healed.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	You should know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all similar injuries to the arm are treated in the same way as those to the arm; therefore, the restoration is done identically, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his nose is broken, turn him around.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one can see great pain, and the sight is clear; and turn back.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then order an extension, and make it even, and tie the joints evenly; however, the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, so the extension must be lighter and less severe; and adjust it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two long wands that color the leg on one side and the other, and are long from the ankle to the hip; then wrap them both above and below, and tie them in the middle, and at this liaison cannot descend the leg to the right or to the left, and so it is good; and no one administers two wands from the long leg, and if it is wood, and he puts the leg to ward off movement, and properly does this in the fracture or there is a wound; and moves each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; and if the cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the feet
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	There is no fracture at the ankle, but there is often a fracture at the foot and only once in two and never otherwise; it comes only broken with many conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture at the foot, and you see these bones rise up one above the other, so put your foot on the ground as though you wanted to walk, then now place your foot on its side, where the bones are raised, then press them down again until they return to their places; then plaster it over and stir it, and place a small table of II plain boards under the stomach of the foot, then fasten it in front of the foot, then you have wrapped drapes around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if the swelling has gone down, because you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Et s’il i a aucuns des deux brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit aux deux de la main; puis met au deux brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou deux, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun deux une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget the other things that I have said about the other breakers, as we have said; and attend to each accident as it occurs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the elbow joint
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is broken by nature in a woman, if she is made to sit enlarged, then lean her on the back of the spine, and support her with one hand; then fill the wound with cotton of nature, and put as much in it as you can; then remove the woman from the bed, and pull her spine little by little, and at that moment let the cotton out, until it comes to the entry of nature, and the bone returns with the pull; and when she urines, if the cotton comes out, and when she has finished urinating, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: the break will be healed, and she will be able to walk; take a bladder of sheep's milk, and tie a cord around the navel, and pour all the milk into nature; then blow in the cord forming, until the milk has gone inside: nature will thus heal the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for several days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	Et when the man's or woman's nose is broken, let it be set back as we have said in the femur bone; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his mind to it and practices it, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means many things right way of restoration: hear now.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the virile member, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and pour the virile member with it; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed without surgery.
de brisure avec plaie	for break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For break with wound, it is fitting that he who has broken a bone or joint or similar thing should be healed now, so that the wounds that we have spoken of by testimony may be proven true.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, if the vitriol does not come out, then you must restart restoring the broken one in the same hour, or the next day, since the pustules are not coming out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the pustules come out, and you stop restoring it until the next day, as long as the pustules are calm, and don't touch them for three days, because you will bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the skin surface, it is convenient that you put it at the end lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal to your hands, take this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and whose width corresponds to the quantity of the wound; and for that one is necessary to immerse it three or four times, according to whether it is necessary to immerse it in each cure of a broken one; and be short and a little thick, so that it does not press on the limb when you work with it, and be sharp at the front, and wide in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "pallanche", so that the curved head of the bone should be placed on top of the base of the skull; and it is to be straightened out once, until it comes back, and even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	If the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you must chop off the base of the bone until the instrument has the power to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then take an appropriate instrument, or chisel or saw, at your command; then resect what has been held in the bone with roughness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is brought back together, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you make it so that it is in its natural position, then dip the wound in black vinegar, and carefully cover it; and do not put on wax or any other oil where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer salves when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover all around with the quantity of salve appropriate to the wound, and take good care that the wound is not stripped along with the fracture; and many such things have been done to this end, and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient sometimes; and the instrument for breaking is softer and less sharp than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come to pass, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it does not fit that you put it on splints; but wrap it up tightly, in lieu of splints, with hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two to fall bow in the wound, if it is this that you have put on all the while, and you put on an ointment healing wounds, so as ointment tetrafarmaçon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the members be arranged in such a way that the bow does not move leichtigly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if a day passes and he cannot bear it but comes together again, and there are little pieces of bone that make it come to pass that you have to close the wound with a bandage, and all these troublesome pieces that bring about pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is a fistula that has come to light or some other kind of corruption, then you must cure it according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opened on a member, as the bone of the cheek or of the shoulder, and other similar large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but leave it to rot; perhaps after XX or XXX days, then heal the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And the bruises that come about with time
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	come about again after the season of the break, mostly when it is near a joint, and a ugly thing it is to see the shape of the limb; and perhaps cannot make the limbs move naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care, therefore, if we are wounded: if we administer bitter medicines, as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcacollege, ochre, and similar things; so that you do not apply any of these things alone, or all together, and confound them with wine of bitterness, or with lye or honey; and put them on a mold, and bind them well, and do not remove the bandages day after day; and then loosen them, and start a new one, until the nodules are hardened; or you press them onto a well-made piece of plaster; for the property of plaster is that it hardens all swellings on the limbs; and if the nodule has become hardened like stone, it is necessary to cut it off, if it has come to light, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone has healed, and there remains after weakness and tenderness of the members for any of these reasons: that it was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or that there were too many ligaments, and could not bring the member into its proper position; or because of a multitude of wounds; or because of great movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, so
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood multiplies within him; and give him bath, and provide him pleasure and exercise; then put poultice on the member so that the poultice attracts much nourishment, and moisten it often with warm water, until the nourishment corrects the member's shape; and return it to its natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two broken limbs after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after recovery, and the bone is cracked open, and the form of the limb is ugly, but it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that we should break a limb anew, for many fools have done this in our land; such practices are blamed, and they bring about great harm and sometimes even death. However, if the nodules and torture are fresh, it is good to immerse them in warm water or soft-softing herbs are cooked, as foils of whale, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the patch is made with a healing ointment, such as well-made dyachilon, and you take the muskellaige of whale, and confound it with goose fat or oil of sise-seed, and make a patch with it; or you take greasy figs, and grind them with hay of colon, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is the shoulder bone moved by constant and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the member becomes stiff and hardened, as in stone, it must be opened with iron, covering up to the bone, cutting finely slightly; and put resin and study for the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is necessary now to bring back with force.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one is delayed, and the joints swell, and by chance it is reset to its place; because then it cannot be moved at all by the swelling: many times it causes spam and other pains; nevertheless, when this will happen, let the patient be made well, then let it be left, until the abscesses are calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it slightly, and heal every limb as the cure comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chaplets of dislocations of the shoulder until the tip.
des mandibules	teeth
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And let the jawbones be dislocated too, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: or they are a little out of place, and become a little soft; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the chest, and cause the saliva to flow from the mouth so that it cannot be held or closed, and wrap the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return by these four dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly take it to hospital, and do not delay; and in this manner that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and squeeze a little bag of water from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands be away, to make it equal; and order the patient that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he looks at the wound evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is a broken jaw, together with the two mandibles, let him be raised with cold water and oil, until he is raised slightly; do not tarry in raising it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they have been raised evenly, and the mouth of the sick person closes well with a mollifying agent, put him on drapings soaked in oil-and-wax paste, then lightly tie them together; and let the sick person sleep on his back, and his cheeks between two pillows, so that he does not move or strain himself at all, but eat lightly, until the pains are gone, and the mandíbulales are healed and sound; and then feed him lightly, and do not try to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandíble is well healed and sound.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set back in place within an hour, and are not turned to their places, so that there come fever and a usual heat, and by chance an abdominal discharge, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see that, then know that it is a loss; and many times die those to whom it has happened, in nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not come out of its socket within the continuance of the arm and of the hand, and is dislocated no more than once on either side, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then press it to its form with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and tie it up; and the jaw which is towards his stomach cannot be dislocated; unless so, and if it is dislocated no more than once, then set it back to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and tie it up, and command to the patient that he rest as long as he is well; and in this way is also set the jaw of the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	I understand that the shoulder can only become dislocated in three ways: either it comes off at the top of the shoulder blade; or at the top of the thigh; or sometimes it goes back towards the shoulder, but this rarely happens; and many times it becomes dislocated forward towards the arm, but this often happens to those who have a good amount of strength, because for them it means being hospitalized; and to those who have enough strength, they recover without pain and go back to their normal lives.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	Sometimes it happens to some people that there is an impact or a break, and the shoulder becomes dislocated because of a hot abscess, and they think that it has become dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	So you need to test it out for yourself and then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And there is an end to the dislocations when it goes down the neck, and set apart between the shoulder that is sick and that which is sound, and you will find manifest difference between them; and you will find in the chief of the shoulder a pit, and draw the neck to the table the chief of the shoulder, as though it were one egg; and the sick can not bring his hand to his nose, or make any movement; and likewise, if it is dislocated at the top, except that it is hidden, for you will see it clearly on the table; and this way of dislocation is not but to be brought back, when it is new, or when the bone is broken.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers lift up the hand of the sick person, then put on them gloves without touching the shoulder, and lift up the joint by force to its place; and the ministers lift up the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our days later, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and soft and soothing poultices are given, as an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and are applied; then the patient is to be placed on his back, and a soft girdle is tied around the shoulder, neither too loose nor too tight, then the doctor takes hold of the patient's hand and pulls gently, and another doctor rubs the patient's shoulder, so that it does not move; this shoulder returns immediately, and if you do it in this way: that you bring a man who is larger than the patient; and he stands on his right side, and raises the patient's shoulder off the ground, and lifts the girdle up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another doctor pulls the patient's hand down towards his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so then with him nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And so we will do in another way: and that is if a long stick is inserted into the earth, of which the joint should also be like a pistol, and not too big or too small; then let it be wrapped with a scarf, but that it have a drape over it, and the patient be lying on the long stick; then let his hand be extended down one side forming, and the joint will return to its place gradually; and if it does not return by all of these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick from the arms of two hands with a diameter of three fingers wide, which has the head in such a way that it can enter perfectly into the assyle, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then let him lie on the top of the stick with the scarf wrapped around it, so that the patient is not hurt, then let it be inserted into the assyle of the patient; and spread your arms up the long stick, and hold the aid on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, and then put the arm on a step of a ladder with a diameter of a finger wide, and let his hands be extended down, and let it be left hanging from the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done in any way, that you put upon the shoulder an equal woolen sphere, then put the plaster prepared of powder from the mill, with incense and aloes of uff, on all the shoulder and around, then remove the spine from before, and turn the tie onto the plaster, and embrace the hand at his neck, and remain your hands in that way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck a little, until the members are comfortable, for he will heal sooner; and then suck more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is hardened and has not become softened, he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place because of moisture or for another reason, that you administer cauterizations to three parts, as it is placed before or with the paste of the cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it slides after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise its arm upstairs, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are torn or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint has never been properly positioned.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is toward the breast and the nipples, or behind, if it is made by a sudden movement, and stretching of the hands, and I administer another place; and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes greyness to the member, and late motion, so the patient often bath, as long as that greyness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at the front and back, and does not return to its place; it is dislocated from all sides, and most obviously in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly placed, since we can see it and feel it clearly; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way as the absces heel comes out, because if an abscess heel came out, it would be worse to reset it; and by chance cannot be reset from all sides equally, more so behind; it is more painful than other dislocations, and by chance can cause death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is done, when it is such that you can reset it, extend its hand with your two hands; and the arms are spread wide, and the hands of the patient around the neck according to the healthy side, backward and forward, and press the joint at its base together, or at the root of its palm, as long as it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, so it comes back when he doubles his hand to his hand, and proud of the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not come back to its place, then give it a strong extension; and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and they tint them two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see the joint to the joint to his hand, then oign it with any oil to soften the joint, then bottle the joint firmly, as long as it recovers; and when it is in place, then put it on a dry plaster with sheep's fat, and strain it firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is secure in its place, then loosen it and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well placed, then begin again the plastering and the tying, and leave it so for some days until it is securely set. Then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint has been moved, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or put on the joint a lamb skin of fat, then leave it for a day and a night, then reset the bone, and let him enter or bathe; and when he sweats, rub the joint well, then put the skin back on, and then enter or bathe again; and do this twice or three times until it is healed; and if you see, then put on the heel of a wet horse with heated butter, and stretch it over; then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is easy to reset, more so than other joints. However, it must be returned to its place immediately, while it is still dislocated, as well as when the joint swells or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when resetting, put the injured hand on a table, and extend the fingers, and make them even, so that the palm faces the joint's alignment, and keep it extended while it heals. However, you must check that it is in the right place; then, put the patient's palm down on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the patient' palm down on the table, and extend the fingers to their natural alignment.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; but if not, then extract the pus from the abscess, and let it remain in this state of no return.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it back in place after several days, then the joint will remain twisted; and there is no benefit to the patient except that his hands are wet, and he cannot extract anything at all: then know that the nerve has been cut, or an artery; unless there is another cause, other than extracting with a gentle cautery, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put the poultice that we have described on it, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then remove it and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no break, if the wet hot water, and rub until he is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are never dislocated on either side, nor at the back of the palm or the belly; then they are joined again and the dislocation is taken to the thumb as long as it revives, then hold the head of the two fingers, and tilt them towards the part where they are joined; and leave it there for a day, and then put them straight that day; and take off the bandage, if you have done so, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often, as long as it is tight, and do the same thing when it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you did before, until it is well; and do the same thing, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are never dislocated on either side, nor at the back of the palm or the belly; then they are joined again and the dislocation is taken to the thumb as long as it revives, then hold the head of the two fingers, and tilt them towards the part where they are joined; and leave it there for a day, and then put them straight that day; and take off the bandage
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there will be no cure, because the patient quickly dies.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions come without will, cannot be held, and often the members are softened, or the II cheeks or the II arms or I And often the eschinea mutates to III parts; the one who mutates behind is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you reward if it has come from childhood: there is no cure or healing of everything.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of curing with great words did not bring much benefit to all; but I have condensed it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilosity that comes from behind the foot before, there is no beginning or healing; and also that which comes directly on II sides, and cannot be healed but that which comes properly at the back, as I said; it is that the patient be laid face up in an equal position, and has his eyes free so that he does not get hurt; then put a log in the earth-formed head, and another under the knees, and tie a rope behind the patient, and another under the ankles; and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other under the knees, among the II logs; and let them be well fastened, as we have said, and let the mirer put his palms on the back-bone, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, take a bowl of three arms long, and cover the wall with it, and let the patient be on one side, and pour the head of the bowl over the wall, then put the middle of the bowl on the spine; and place his toes on the other head of the bowl, and press firmly until he returns to place; and if you see anything, do it with a turn that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And that you stick two torches to the head of the patient with an arm long, and place the toes on the other, and have between each torch, upside down and backwards, a palm of space long; and have in each torch a turner or link, so that the torch holds firmly to the ground, so that it does not move; and between each pair of torches have a small torch turning, so that the link turns, and have two small torches of a palm long, to turn the turner; and then bind the knot that is among the torches to the turner at the head, and the other knot to the toes at the other turner, and each servant turns his turner on all the knot, and the master makes the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, so put on plaster with much egg, and then the strips, and then the wood of a tablet of three long fingers, which, purifying its place from gilly-blussity and the part of the spine healthy, then the thread of a thread, as we have said, and use subtle fattening for the patient until he is healthy; and if anything comes at the end of health, then administer softening medicines and soothing with the wood that we have said before; and never give one piece of plunk, and never does the appearance come in the posterior spine of the back, and believe that this is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, for thus should you not have presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the joints of the thigh and the shoulder come only from dislocations, not at all like the other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to IV parties: within and without, before and behind; and most within, and little before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of his dislocations within is such that when one joins the sick leg with the sound, it is further away, and more so than the healthy genitals, and cannot double the sick knee on fire; and it is the place which is swollen hot of abscess because the head of the thigh comes here.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him whose it comes out before, is that this accident is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him whose it comes before are that his leg is well according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double the knee with pain, and when he is made to walk, he cannot go forward, and holds his urine back, and swells the ankle, and when he goes, he passes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that one behind, if it cannot spread its knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the hip bone is softened, and the head of the thigh is out of place between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And those who have this dislocation should not be treated unless it is old, and does not cause delay according to its condition, otherwise there is no cure for it; and it only leads to death if one is presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those who have this fresh dislocation, and it is of the four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reduce the joint, and put it back in place and move it to the right and left; by chance it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not come back in this way, it is necessary that you prepare the minister very strongly, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the hip with a strap; and other ministers extend their hand above and below at the same time, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains so for a while.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to put the patient on his back, in order that you may apply a cure to his back and legs, then place the bandage over the root of the thigh, and the loop which is behind the thigh, then extend the bandage upwards towards the thigh, and towards the forceps; then apply other ministers to his arms, and embrace the large loop of the thigh, and extend it towards the back: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot do this way that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope, and let them hang down from the two heels and the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended twice as much as the other; then hang them upside down from the top of a post, and let them hang down two arms' length; then command one minister to embrace the root of the thigh, and let there be other ministers hanging with the patient who embrace the thigh well, for the joints now return very easily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are far away, so lay the patient down, as we said in that which concerns gimbositeit, and strap firmly the leg properly, and also the foot; then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then put one torch between the legs of the patient on the form; and plant wet flags around, so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let him hold the dislocation equally to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a table, and press him as we said in the gimbosité, and lay the patient on his back.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are in front, so extend the leg with pain that it is on the sick angle, and according to what I said; and let the patient hold his pain by his other hand, and press him upside down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et s'il est dislocated au loin, il ne convient pas de le tirer vers l'avant, de le lever sur la terre, mais qu'il soit plutôt replacé comme lorsqu'il était déchaîné au loin, comme nous l'avons dit plus tôt en parlant du couché sur les deux hanches; et qu'il soit placé sur sa face, et que la cuisse soient étirées comme nous l'avons dit ci-dessus, et qu'on appuie sur la jointure à la table; et il sera terminé lorsque le patient étendra ses jambes, qui seront longues; alors on retire la coquille, on met le plastre, et on tire d'une bande, de sorte que la hanche ne bouge pas; et qu'il repose trois jours ou quatre, puis qu'on le change, on met le plastre dessus; et si tu vois qu'elles sont longues, on les tire comme avant, et on les laisse trois jours; puis on les change, et on fait faire du bruit aux membres jusqu'à ce qu'ils soient confortés.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the hip joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hip joint is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, outward, and backward; do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient that he bend his leg to his groin, and if it does not flex at the groin, knowing that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his knee between your palms, and pull them apart, then bend the two sides of the knee together; and let others extend his foot, as long as the hip returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg slightly at the groin; and put the plaster on, and make him flex his leg at the groin, and join it together firmly for three days or four, then take it off; and do not work the patient to walk until his members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, then administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the thigh, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, and never completely displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is displaced, and it is directed forward to the part where it has been displaced: let us bring it back gently with our hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is displaced from the top, so that you must make the patient sit upright, and support him by the leg, over the ankle; then bring the foot toward you with your right hand, and then back again, and then extend it upward, and blow on the foot upward; and do this twice, as we have said, in blowing and bringing it forward; if it returns, it is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place a staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie the blankets around, so that he does not fall; then support the leg with one minister, and others extend the foot with their hands or with the strapping; that it be held fast by the staff; then make the minister who is holding the dislocated joint at his hands, and others support the sound leg also, and the strappings should be equal, and the staff should be placed at the top between the patient's knees to hold him up while he is being extended; then put the minister who is holding the dislocation at his hands, and others support the sound leg also, and the strappings should be equal, and the staff should be placed at the top between the patient's knees to hold him up while he is being extended; then blow on the foot upward, and make the patient walk; then blow and bring it forward twice, and make him walk twice, and if it does not return, then make the patient stand, and put a staff under his feet, and support him by the arms, and make him stand, and let the minister who is holding the dislocated joint put his foot on the ground; then the other ministers should bring the sound leg and the strappings up to the same level, and the staff should be placed at the top between the patient's knees to hold him up while he is being extended.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it has hardened, put the plaster on top of it, and form the bandage, and tie the foot to the leg, and take care that the ties are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and the bandage will become loose, if the plaster is hard; then remove it after three or four days, and do not let the patient walk for four days. And if he walks before this term, it is not a sure thing that he has not dislocated again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come up, you must calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, you must stretch them gently before work, and it is a light thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are in the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit down on a level plain or a table straight up, and place your foot on what is open from these joints, then press your foot firmly until it straightens out; and when it has healed and there is no more opening, put a board under two legs, then form the bandage, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and let the patient rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is restored, many times the patient dies: so be not presumptuous in the cure, unless you are skilled in the art and have long used it, and are compassionate and tardy, do not be bold; and use at the beginning of soothing things for an abscess, and leave the patient to God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, now restore the member to its place, so that the abscesses come; and when the member is in its place, administer drying ointments, and cure the wound, as it should be, with poultices; and if there is a fracture and small bones are out of place, then set them, and do as we have said for simple illnesses; and guard against entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will cost you dear according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming and protecting yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
