O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the final word on medical knowledge, with its content and explanations, and with its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise for you, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And for this reason the work of hands is treated in our region and spread throughout all places; it is a difficult science and worthy of study, and there is nothing to delay it except for the small descriptions in books of ancient times that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed up, and the science is distanced.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	For it seems to me that I can make this treatise alive again with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and of other instruments for the work, with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in it must surmount the science of anatomy, as Galenus says, until he knows the structure of the limbs and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of nerves and veins and their numbers, and movement and rest of joints, and the place of their emergence.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Iopras says that one must do with the hand what one cannot do with work, and least of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above must be careful so as not to make a mistake and mislead people; therefore, I have repeatedly warned many of those who engage in this science and who abandon themselves to theory without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut open an abscess on the neck of a woman and cut into the arteries in the neck; for so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was large; so he brought a piece of the bladder with him, and he died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen it called out for a treatment, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he were to treat it, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took in treatment a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant healerguys removed the break above the wound as tightly as possible, and left it so that the wound had no relief, and finished it thus; and he commanded that it should not be loosened; and delayed it thus that the leg became completely frozen and the bones came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I dislocated it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	However, all the ways to cure him had been exhausted or his member, and he could not be cured; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the members were all lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder, which was an abscess that was corrupted and then inflamed by the evil of its own virulence.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when the chancre is purred by melancholy humor, it cannot be cured except by touching it with iron if it is in a good place so that one can completely destroy what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, very careful son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each division of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For as you must keep yourself so that the bad folk may not speak ill of you: if you take your weapons in agreement, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and leave behind the expected sicknesses of grief health; and bear your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Some of his admonitions are: 'Do not take up with a bad illness, lest you be called a madman.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the bottom up to the top, and of forms of instruments, and of fermness of cauterization, and of all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter concerns the art of cutting and piercing, of suction cups and wounds, of extracting arrows, and similar matters; and it contains the order and forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter concerns the restoration of dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and it contains orders concerning the shape of tools just as they are to be used, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we must remember the work; it is necessary that I give the quality of help and the harm of each kind.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and the most secret answers; and many learned people would speak of it, and agree with what I say; and I am satisfied with a few words, for I shorten my speech.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery helps everywhere on all kinds of skin, except for one kind of skin: that is to say, on hot-blooded people who have moist matter, and on dry-blooded people who have dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some devised and said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is of no help in disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and must not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor by dryness; and he who said this, who said that cautery makes great aid for hot and dry diseases that come upon men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man with his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all way, except for that which is tried by the long usage of the cautery, and who knows by experience the diversity of the complexions of men, their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the effects and space of time; of other complexions we have no fear, even if it comes from cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this should agree and fit together with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery works well if it is applied to the cure of secretions, and has greater power than fiery medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member in any way.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fiery medicines come from one member to another in flight, and bring sickness of relief to the affected member; and by chance fire, for its greatness and for the goodness of its substance, does not burn, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And what I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the truth of things; and because I apologize for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret that is found in fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says in proving; so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they must be made in what season the cauterization should be done, and let them be prayed for.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all seasons, for because the sudden damage that comes through the aid of cauterization; and most especially the cauterization is for necessary pains without delay that cannot wait for the season when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think once, son, as they do so badly; because with the disease that is cured by cauterization there is no return; and it should be thus; but it is not so; for cauterization is nothing more than medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is better than medicine for the haste of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And that which is possible to achieve is that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and its place and virtue; and superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where he has little surplus and moisture, as with cautery for pain, and similar things, and the like pain does not return; but it did happen a little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand why the cauterizes are called the medicines of medicine, and that is to see; but they do not believe that cauterizes are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and cauterizes are the medicines of medicine because when we administered ways of cure in no disease and they do not deserve, then let us administer cauterization, and it deserves.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, open well that cauterizes are the medicines of medicine, not because of the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that the tools of gold are more healing than those of iron, and they spoke of the fire only because of the quality of gold and its high essence; and they said that the fire of healing does not cause pus, but this is not true for some people; and the tools of gold are more healing than those of iron, as it has been said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	But if you heat the gold instrument, you will not know when it is hot enough by its color, and it cools down soon; and if you heat it too much, it goes out into the fire, and so there is sufficient impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, because we have made it ready for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I command you this chapter of the law up to the point where the eyes are less heavy to find.
dou cautere olivaire	to cauterize with olive oil
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	to cauterize with olive oil and to treat headaches, pain in the teeth and throat, and many other diseases caused by cold, including paralysis, palsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization should be such that the patient is cured by a liquid medicine that cleanses the head, or three or four times, depending on what the virtues and the habit and the patience of the patient allow him to endure; and then wash the head of the patient again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit with his hands crossed and place his palms on the back of his neck; after that, place the root of your two fingers on the root of his neck between his two hairlines; then let your two hands come together, and if he bleeds, heat the olive-oil cautery, from which comes this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the fire cautery on the bone, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in returning; then release your hand gradually, and take hold of the bone if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after taking a piece of twine, put cotton in it wet and soft, and put it on the bone, and let it be III days; after putting cotton wet in wax, leave it for as long as the bone is heated; after treating the wound with ointment that is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders said that when the wound takes longer to heal, the more it will scar; and for this reason, let us act quickly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one must keep the fire cautery on the bone for as long as a part of the bone is burned, and then take off what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And serve the other that he should cauterize so much longer upon, and push so hard from the bone as far as I tell you that women put in their furze for this that the humors may come out; and it must be that the wound is kept open a long time; after it must be cured and made secure.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases, save that there is fear in some men; and it seems to me that I should let it alone; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and moreover when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first sight of cauterizing seems more safe and gentle to me, and thus I use it in assembly for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all parts of the body there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills called "coqises", and cleansing enemas, oils, and poultices; and if one does the fire cautery which we have just mentioned, it will help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's body is of strong constitution, and that it is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the fire cautery to each horn of the head as we have described above and making the vessel in which the fire is placed; then place the cupping glasses; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels too much pain during this cauterization, I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the corn cauterizations be thinner than those with which we cauterize the skin of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	The fire cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain spreads throughout the head and continues up to the oil, and the chiés is purged with medicine that removes fever, and other cures as I mentioned in the division of diseases, then perform fire cautery according to two methods, that is, with medicinal water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery: Take a sweet alizarin, and peel it off the skin and dip it into the oil of the chiés, then apply it to the temple or place where the pain is with your hand in such a way that you can hold the alizarin on the skin; and when it has been held there for twelve or thirteen hours, then take it off and dip it in garlic juice, and leave the wound for two or three days; then cover it with cotton dipped in wool grease until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of wound care as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this one of some burning medicines that I have written or half-time medicine burner.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer so that it is this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "close" for the head is made in the form of a clo or it has I pit of corbeure, and in the middle to a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little slightly, until the halfway of the scar burns; and remove your hand that the artery does not burn, which is gone away, and runs abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in the shape of a string, and place it on the spot for III days; then I put wet cotton in butter, and then cure the spot of wound care as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer which is called "cultellare", at all points, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	As for the treatment of migraine, as we have already said in the division of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the fire cautery before mentioned in medicine and iron does not satisfy him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign so on the sore spot a line half an inch long, and hold your hand back once, and pull it off so that you do not cover the artery and do not come to the bone; and guard against the jaw that moves when you chew, and let the rest of the work lie; but I will tell you how to stop the pain when the artery is copped, and I will show you at what place it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him at the nape of the neck as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said, or the extractive chapastre with the cautery having II blades; and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears from cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied liquid medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not cease, then apply this cauterization, which is called "poins", whose form is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After having pierced all around the ear that is troubled, or around both of them since the pain persists at the entrance to the canal, and you have located the place where you want to pierce, and there are X points around each ear; after having done this, cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	that should be cured by fire is not stronger than those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of illnesses; and do not make any fire for similar things that come from scabs and meat lice.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of torture that moves with fluid from the head and gargling, and it does not matter, then you must treat the disease with three fire tortures: one at the root of the ear, another a little further up the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; apply the fire to the healthy part, and let the half-burned fire remain; and this is the form of the fire torture:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the surgical knife that we have put before you is a little more subtle, and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; after treatment, keep it as I have said, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexies are old and you treat them as we have said, they do not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauterizations: II on the two horns of the head, and I cut the head, and I put fire to it which is called "vasels," as we have said before, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of tar
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This is a treatment for this disease: give the patient many large pills that are dry and pungent for the brain; after healing all his head, put on his occiput the resin of saffron, which is written or spoken about in the treatise on plasters; and this is the method of cauterization: do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is well here, it is good; and if not, he does three fire cauterizes on the head at the root, with two spaces between each cauterize; and cure it like the others, and if you see them quiver, and the patient suffers, do one in the middle; and if there is a trade, there are two others on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and let the cauterizes that are called 'olive' be done as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed and clean and that what we have said before be done again; after washing the head of the patient, then he does a fire cauterize on the head and on each of the two horns, one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers and is ill, do three cauterizes on the spine of the back; and let it be until the fire of the last cauterize has gone out, and raise your hand; after that, cure him until he is well, and let the cauterizes that are called 'olive' be done as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	For the fire cautery, it is only appropriate for those who are flematic; first, however, the brain must be washed out and other remedies mentioned in the section on great and suffering patients should be used.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot bear the fire, let them gargle and chew to wash out the brain frequently with good meat; afterwards, place the head in the middle and apply the fire according to what we have said before, and also on the neck and each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, do so as I have said for those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the spine and neck, applying the fire olive-wise as I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform the following procedure for them:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When because of melancholy there are excess fluids or corrupted moisture and gross pus, then half-fire cautery as we have said to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if because of melancholy there is excess fluid declining to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he should drink something that clears the brain, according to what has been said in the division before this.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have reposed the head of the patient; after that make a well-formed turban out of linen, also as a circle, if you put it on the head; and let the patient sit with his back well supported and held in place; then present the liniment, and wet it with old butter; and heat it gently by the fire so that he can tolerate it; after that empty the circle from inside the turban and let it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with another good treatment, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if you see cauterization, make many punctures all over the cauterized area.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterizing moistens the scalp, increased; and then put cotton wet in butter and Linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes of the hairs
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes first the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient purifying thing, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that he orders him to re-apply the scalp, and makes a fire cautery on the scalp, and does two cauterizations on the temples because they are exposed; and keep the cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the escape of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with mud as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and with caution how to stop bleeding; and never is cauterization done or the bone is removed from behind.
dou cors des larmes	the tears of two hearts
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	the tears of two hearts are old and accustomed and are along the veins, or cut off the arteries that are in appearance at the top of the head; and one can see that it is of the cold and wet superfluity, therefore do I make the fire cautery that I said at the beginning of the awing down to the hair: I cauterize the top, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries where haters are removed from the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes well over the brow with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the tears of two hearts flow inside the hair
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give him three cups of ale for three nights; after that he raises his head, and makes a cautery in the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries in the cautery called "clavilis" on the two horns, a little away from the hair; and guard the artery so you don't cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	So that this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauteries on the two horns as long as the horns are; and do not let your hand rest until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Oil-colored hair.
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has passed that the hair of the oiled have been converted to the parched, and touch oil, and there is done on two ways of cauterization: namely, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient in your care; after that, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is also as the flesh of the heart, and this is the beginning of the sign to scratch the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and muskellunge of peony on the oil, then heat the cautery so that this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have sewed little by little several times, so that the burn is in the right place; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil comes out; then gently lift your hand, and leave it like that for III days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as the scabs are laid; after the cure of the wound until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the cautery on the same middle level, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural position, and is even, and does not stick to the hair oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal hot cautery is that you command the sick person to leave the hairs as long and even as possible; then make of parchment the shape of the bay leaf; then take French soap and very hot water, each a .Z., and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then pour it on the paper; and if the illness is in only one oil, then put the other also, and cover with cotton wet in oil; and the sick person's joints should be in your hand, and place your thumb over the medicine, and press a little and rub every time the sick person feels tingling from the medicine, for he feels tingling also as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done for so long, if the medicine has gone to your head.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the medication has passed, if the swelling has gone down, then lift up the bandage as if it were lifted by fire or by incision; and if so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then put more medicine on the swelling where the medicine has gone, until your hairs are long and even, and your nails are cut; and then put cotton wet with oil on it as soon as the feverishness is gone, after treating the swelling which is called 'dysmencorhood' and other things, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to bandage yourself well on your wound by great care so that the medicine does not go into your hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the bandage becomes soft, and the hairs become stuck in the oil, then begin again the medicine on that same place which has been softened by the bandage properly, as you have done before; after treating until it is well; and this is the form of the salve of mirth:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to their nature; and do not return the right path to him whose task is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is appropriate that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip the surgeon's knife in a bottle of oil or wine juice as described above; then heat the cauterizer, and place it on the head as if it were the shape of a feather; together with the knife, so that when you see one, it is pointed at the other, and when you do not see it, it is like a tent; but whatever the case, let it be close to your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, let it open and apply the poultice, and dry it out; and if it is closed, re-open it and treat it firmly; after that, place a very hot cauterizer on it, and keep your hand away from the cauterizer over the part under the oil, so that your hands do not go crazy; and put the cauterizer in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the cauterization just up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, start the cauterization again, and if you need to do it more often, leave it for III days; after that, put cotton wet in oil on it, and let the dressing dry out until it is well, and if forty days pass and it is still not well, then put corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed; and treat it according to what came in the chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way to cauterize a fistula that no ancient said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	In the case of a fistula, and then cut it; then put in the fissure an extremely small hammer so that this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I make it with the quantity of half an ounce of melting; and hold your hand firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, that the melted mass does not run to his oil; and it is good that you put cotton wet in alcohol or vinegar on the oil: The melted mass, if so artfully applied to the place of the fistula, and will be cured by a marvelous cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured with the cauterization that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must give a blow to the nail, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nail according to what is necessary in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	the crevices in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	The mouths of times have had crevices in the lips, which are called "hair", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices with what we have said in the sections on treatments, and the treatment does not help, then according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place there in those crevices as long as it comes out; after treatment, put cerates there until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or in the roots of the teeth, after making it pus and burning and letting it dry and becoming a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not help: then you must have a cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after filling or piercing the fistula, and holding your hand until the iron comes out at its base, and doing so once or twice, after treating with what we have said in the treatment sections, as long as it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after heat the cautery so that its form comes out in this way that you put a string on the tooth; and place the cautery inside, hot as it is, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and continue with the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and let it sit for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the teeth that were moving are settled down, the gums that were softened become tight again, and the moisture that was corrupting dries up.
de la dolor des dens	the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is coldness or heat, and medicines do not help, then there is a need for two types of cauterization: caustice with butter and fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a vagina, and the tip in a spoon of iron or gold; then take cotton and wrap it over the tip of a tent, and the wetness in butter bulge, and put on the tooth aching carefully and hold as long as it cools down; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and see if the wetness of wool and cotton into butter freezes, and put on the aching tooth, and put on iron hot until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Cautery with fire if it is such that you squeeze a metal rod or iron bar, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person; then heat the cautery, for the form will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand as long as the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will increase on the third day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cautery, and then he should drink it; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery of the mouth that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of scars
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scars are of cold moisture and do not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the head of the shoulder of cow's milk until it comes out; and put the cautery on the skin once, or where it is needed, as much as it comes out of the fund of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it there for III days; and put cotton wet with butter as long as the burn is sore; then cure the wound with oil and poultices until it is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the tail:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the neck, and most often when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by restorative medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and keep him from swallowing anything but water.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterization be what is called a 'cleaving'; and heal the wound as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all illness comes from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then make him iij cauterizations on the forelegs between the breasts; and another cauterization run through the pis between II mameles; and let the cauterization be what is called a 'cleaving' according to the form which is in front described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a fire cautery by poking all the way through the "poins" (a term for the points of the ear) from which the shape is described above in the disease of the ears; and let the pokes go up to 30 or so.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards, treat the wound according to what is described above in this chapter: and let the cauterization be done with three burns according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those who are lighter, do three of them.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, have the patient sit on his back and lean forward; then reach with your right hand to the spot inside the ear  (where the joint is) ; and if the joint has come out far enough, heat the cauterizer from both sides, as described above, according to this shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound as far as it pierces up to the ribs, and comes with the figure of cautery together four cauterizes; and because it is made cauterize with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figure of cauterization are four cauterizes; and these nerves are according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is applied on this nerve because it has eight cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After having put on the fire cautery, grind it with oil; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, let the following thing be done: then make a fire cautery on the thick part of the cautery, or many cauterizes pierce in it.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed, and because of the moisture the bone is healed, and the disease is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and moisture until it is removed from its nature, and are multiplied the catarrh to him, and in the ways of usual treatment and he does not benefit, then the patient must be covered with blankets, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	So that later he makes three cauterizations on the back of the hand with the quantity of two drops, making all the cauterizations clavenous, and two cauterizations between the two sides as long as the form of the cauterizations is at three angles, and there is a space between them so that they are not joined together when they move; and let the form of the cauterizations be in this way without any adjusting:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you want to cauterize your stomach with a great cautery, following this form; and he who has doubt about this cautery, cauterize by piercing and signing on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you see fit; then cauterize it at all the cautery that is called "point.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure we had before, until he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Regarding the cure for the liver, which has pain from cold and moisture and strong wind, until it is completely removed from its natural composition due to excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit him if he is annoyed by his enemy; and the sign of a small cautery according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, let the hychondries come out; and leave a space of two inches between each cautery, and the cautery of the long neck, and do not press too hard with your hand at all the cautery; and let it be burned so much that half of the cautery is destroyed, and let the patient lie down on his back; and if he cannot, then let him extend his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterizes of the cutler's art, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and be careful that you do not burn all over, for you would parch all the body; and until it comes to a dimple, for the cure is very subtle in place, and knows to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can tell whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, then feel that the patient does not feel much pain; but if it is in the capsule, then feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then, when this cure has stopped the abscesses, the patient should be attentive to his head; and then signal where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that resembles a pin, from which comes the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cet cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains ces maladies ont corrut aucune fois.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And I cauterize I cauterize as long as the wound is burning, and it comes to sebum, until the bandage is all dry; after the cure according to the cure of the sweats until it is healthy; and it only comes from this cautery that there are no fire that have studied long in the art of medicine, and by which hands these diseases have corrupted no time.
dou cautere de pleuresin	O cauterization of the pleurisy:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that you must make a cauterization with the roots of the arzilla plant, and in this way: take a long root of arzilla, the largest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick as your two fingers; then soak it in oil and heat it on the fire, and cauterize yourself by applying it between the nipple and the collarbone, and make a small cauterization going down a little towards the breast part; and another one above the navel, and one between the two shoulders, and one along the back from the shoulder blades; and do not press your hand hard, but rather open it widely as if you were smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no old man used fire cautery resembling a razor, and they rub it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; and he suffers pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes from which cannot be healed.
de la mice	for the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse, as we have said in the three ways of cauterization, and it does not benefit, then they assigned three ways of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these three ways, one is that you make three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cauterization of the liver that we have said above; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient sweat on his back; and another way of cauterization is that you rub the cauterization which has two roots, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the heat to where the mouse's cut comes from on the left side, and let the elevations that you feel by touching be according to the shape, according to the length of the back, and the cauterization is according to the width of the back.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you have poured the hot liquid until the burn is felt on the other side, then you will have to apply the fire cautery, and in so doing there will be IIII. And if you see it, cauterize all of it with three burns.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the medicine has been applied for a long time, and this is what needs to be done, that is what must be done in front of you said.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work for dropsy, except in the way that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you apply the cure as we have described in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make IIII cauteries around the boude, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidney, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place the pis; and let the cauterization be well placed next to the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery in place for a long time, do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would be quickened, and both intentions would come together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is a key that we have before us; and what is for the back is olive-shaped, according to what has been described above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the tissues
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the tissues are swollen in those who are hyponatremia, and they are pale, then you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and the middle fingers; and gently lift your hand with the cautery without turning it again.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep, for otherwise the swelling would turn purple, and perform the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Apres make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the scrotum; and let the cauterization be long, one above the knee and the other below, across the leg; and leave the cauterizations in place for a long time without treating them, so that they heal; after this treat the other injuries as we have said.
de la menoison	of the castle
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach pain comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive fluids that are in the stomach and intestines remain unafected, it cannot be treated with any remedies; and you will see the patient suffer greatly and become very weak, so make a large cauterization around the navel according to what he has spoken of before, or a cauterization of the navel; and four cauterizations around the loins, one above and one below, near the sinews, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a fire cautery on his hand, and a cautery on each finger, and two small cauterizations on the stomach, because the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and have big cold and moist sores that are corrupt, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does not profit if you make fire: III on the spine of the back, which is all outside with oil little by little and squaring, and I cauterize outside the two bones; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and we see swell the face, then let the face have a big cautery, as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bolea to all cauterize nailed; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating, let the wound remain healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the pus which is called “thelu”
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When coping with the pus, if you heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then set it all ablaze on top of the coped pus; and leave it so that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, from which it will come out; do this once or twice, and if there is much pus, cauterize each one as we have said; after treating with beneficial oils as long as they remain healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on top of the pustule, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate surgery or opening, which we will describe in its place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no opening in the vein, and it is swollen and filled with pus and corruption, then you must provide the whole tent of suture, and be careful that you know exactly how much of the tent it needs.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems like a razor, pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the cautery as many times as there is corruption and pus to be burned, once or twice, according to the amount of medicine needed; and beware of the nerves that are injured, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the core of the bladder and intestine, beware of these vessels, and do not make a cut except in the middle, and think that it is not useless; after having healed the vessel as long as it is healthy, and if the vessels are broken, and the bones are exposed for a long time, then know that the vessel is completely healed; and if the bones are not exposed, know that the vessel is three-quarters healed, and the bone at the bottom is corrupt. And thus, as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys comes with a strong wind and does not respond to the treatment of women, then you should make a cautery on the kidneys from both sides with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned before; and if we do this in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and it will be more effective.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then you make a cautery on the bladder's upper part from behind, where the hair of the perineum begins, and one on each side, and each as long as a finger; and you make another cautery behind, where it is necessary; and you do the clavicle cautery according to the shape described above.
de la marris	of the wound
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and does not allow him to conceive, and the flowers are rotten and late in appearing; and when they come, so great a pain do they cause: then it is necessary that he make three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauterization be clamped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, and for this reason he moves out of his place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be sore, then you should make a circle-like cauterization on the hip socket, and mark in front of the joint around the socket as she turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and if it is, make the cauterization such as those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present, make three cauteries with the olive oil, and let the cauteries be complete as well; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is appropriate that you purge the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After this, make the cautery; and the manner of the cautery should be according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is this: that you cauterize over the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and wide, and between each cautery have the size of two, and let the olive oil cautery be; never do a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the fire cautery at the circle that we have just said in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the flesh of the body is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way that is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make II fire cauteries there where the patient says that the pain is, and a cautery above the ankle three times, two on the left side; and either make the cauterization scalpel-like, or burn the thickness of the flesh; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near it, make the fire cautery there, which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is a physician, let him do more; and if he feels that the pain is in the knee joint towards the thigh, let him perform cauterization with the knife or circular cautery, and let you take good care of all your cauteries so that you do not leave them for even a moment, while burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have also seen many who have performed cauterization on the foot's heel, and left it for so long that the leg was completely collapsed, and the bones as well, and became pierced and rotten in all the bones.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a treatment for the belly that caused death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cauterization on one and then on the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said in the cauterization of the ankle, for this is the manner, make one so large and thick as a thumb nail, or a little less, and between the two cheeks be of the quantity of a pea's width; and let the cheeks be higher on either side, and also as long as fingers, and all of good iron; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and hot, and then put it on the box of the sick hip, and let it turn to the right side; and let one cauterize him once and let him rest for three days; and then make a poultice with butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the cure of ointment until he is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Al-Buqaqum says that we use little of this cautery because of the danger of its regurgitation, and few use it; however, this is a good cautery that can endure it, and let it be applied where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical cautery of fiery tools is so that you make an instrument with a handle on one end and another on the other, and let it be of brass or iron with a wall at a distance, and at its height there are two holes, each of which has the thickness of a thumb; and they open from top to bottom and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After laying him down on his back with his head at the foot of the bed and his chest supported by a pillow, you will then place your hand very high up on his thigh; after that, you will cut off two circles from the warm awl that has been heated in the fire for one hour, and let them cool for a while, so that they can cause the patient pain and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that these also cause a stinging sensation like fire; and when the stinging has passed, you will remove your hand from the instrument and lower the leg of warm wool, and leave it there for three days, and place it in vinegar until the blackening is removed; and let it be for three days until the pus forms; and he would receive help behind after the treatment with ointments until he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, you will make a warm awl in the same way that you did for the hainche; and this is the method of the hot awl, and I have written it down here in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take some small holes so that the point of a razor can enter; and place that pot on top of another well-plumbed pot, and put alkali and charcoal and water softener on it, so much as to cover both the powders completely - you will have to hold them tightly in your hand; and leave them like that until they are all dry and crack; then take all of that water, and pour it over the charcoal and alkali, just as you did before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it is very dry and is used up in the work of medicine and other treatments; because it does this work like fire, and with other medicines that are well-mixed together: honey, mustard, and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure in which an honorable person was cured of the pain of the hip and sciatic vein, and he soaked himself, and he said that no other cure was made, and he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you grind green fresh tar and dry it up, and mix it with a little fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and let it sit; and leave it for three hours, and because of the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he makes him enter or bathe until his body is slightly warm, and he makes him enter the bed, and the pain will go away completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with these medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the ends of a deer's horn, then it heals well; and the cauterization must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another, and wipe it with oil; and put it on the fissure which is between the thumb and the finger called the index.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take dry ends of a deer's horn, and hold them over a fire until they are charred, and put them on the wool, and leave them there until they are blackened; then repeat it, doing so as long as you think that it is coming to the hip, and the pain is ceasing; and this way of cauterizing is called "deer horn cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of the back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or through eating too much, or through excessive evaporation, or through the appearance of expanded cold matter, there are no remedies for these, except that the one who comes from the infusion of cold matter should be treated.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	He must then give him the pills of rot or other, which cause pain in his loins, three lines signed by inch, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the usefulness and the quantity that the sick can support; and it is done cauterization according to the cauterization called "point"; and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the clavicle-like cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they become stiff when they stand up and fear; and you see in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see him cured, let him be cauterized with the clavicle-like cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	Let the fire cautery equally affect each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you can see, cauterize evenly around the spine with the fire cautery, keeping the points of the burning tool about two or three lines apart, and let them be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the fire cautery has been applied, as we have described, take care not to apply it to the gizzards in such a way that it reaches the nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	that cause pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the joints ache because of moisture that spreads to each limb, and when pain comes from the foot, what is known properly as podagra, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicine, then cure it with fire cautery in this way: Make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you touch on the face of the foot, make a fire cautery to all the fire cauteries that are claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come only up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, do a fire cautery on each knee III cauterizes or IV of each part, in all olive cauterize; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand tight except for as long as the skin of the leg is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, do two lines of fire; and if there is no pain left in the two, do a fire cautery on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come only up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good advice to the patient and use medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this good government and you purge the wind, then you will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syph
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in the groin, and the ball becomes hot and new, then it is necessary that when you see him heal, he does not eat meat that day; and use things that cool his belly, so that the end sinks from his belly; then let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his beard as long as his balls are repaired, and bring them to your hands, and sign by cutting above the bone of the testicle, and all a sign that is like half a circle above the neck; then heat the fire with which it is done:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as he is white and has a pleasant smell.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then return the balls to their place; and the minister should hold his hand so that it does not turn back; and work well on the legs of the sick person, and put a pair of shoes on him and a sergeant on his legs, and another on his feet which hold his hands; then place the cauterizer on his sign on all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not hit it the first time, start again another time until you come to the bone; and guard carefully that the ball does not move when you are making the cauterization; that you do not burn it; and that by this the sick person does not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cauterizer, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterizer of children be subtle according to their size, and of big people also great according to their size; after III days cure the place of the cauterizer of butter until the scorching is healed; after it cure other ointments until it is healthy, and lay the sick person for 40 days on his back until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened slowly, so that the ball does not come out when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, they bring him a well-made bandage, and change it every 40 days; and let there be good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against too much yelling; and when he does this teaching then is he entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here the cure of cauterizing in his ointment.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, they do the cauterization of the cauterization according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the old ones said that one should cauterize with the cauterizer at III angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the head of the neck; and make a line with your finger across the wound from side to side, and another behind it, and hold all the nail clippings together in your hand.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and less painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	causing old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, or from a bruise or an injury, and this pain continues for a long time, and the medical cure does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the fire that is called "pinceau", and do the cauterization according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location of torments and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is well after the first cauterization, it is good; but if not, start again with another cauterization on top of that one, for this is the custom: you must keep applying the cauterizations until the patient is completely healed.
de meselerie	of medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Of disease, are treated once with cauterization by great help, and most often by the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you can see the cauterizer, take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we said in the division of diseases, and does not rest or remain, and you doubt that corruption will pervade the whole malady, then you shall do V cauterizes on the top of the head: I cut off the top, and the other towards the front at the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind on the nape; and I let it burn so long with the cauterizer that it comes to the bone, and so long that the scabs come out without any vapors of bad humors coming out; then cauterize the mouse according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si le malade a la fièvre, il faut lui faire une cautérisation avec du feu sur tout son corps; et si la fièvre baisse, alors il faut faire des cautères comme ceux-ci: un cautère sur la nuque, deux sur l'arrière du cou, six sur le dos, un grand sur la tête, un autre petit près de l'ombilic, deux sur les épaules, deux sur les côtes, un sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et un dans la paume de la main. Il faut aussi se méfier des nerfs qui courent sous le corps et qu'il ne faut pas brûler; et il ne faut jamais faire de cautère sur l'os du poignet ou sur celui de l'estomac, ni sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And if the patient has a fever, then he must have his whole body cauterized with fire; and if the fever goes down, then you must make the following types of cauterization: one on the neck, two on the back of the neck, six on the back, one large on the head, one small near the navel, two on the shoulders, two on the ribs, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and one in the palm of the hand. You must also be careful of the nerves that run under the body and not to burn them; and you should never make a cauterization on the wrist bone or on the stomach bone, nor on the liver. And know that when I do more cauterizations, then I do more help and benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already very corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization is great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in iron ways.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, leave the wound of flour with honey and other cures until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healthy, then make the cauterization on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; and then heal with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is made to cauterize and by hand and by foot and at the back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is osteoclast; but nevertheless do not interfere with it unless you know the members and exits of moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of the back
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the patient called "albaras" is awake and the medicine does not help, then burn him with a fire cautery very slightly, according to the quantity of the juice of curcuma, until the blenchour [a type of fever] is taken out and its color changes; then treat with flour of barley and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of lamb and blood of owl, each in part; and mix them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply it to the fire until he is cured.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment for syphilis by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the plague [syphilis] begins to appear, and you see it stopping, then burn it with a fire cautery that seems like a circle all around the area of the plague.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And some say that one should also burn the center of the plague; but I do not think this is good, for it will reduce it to a ulcer and corruption, and I have never heard of such a thing; and it is even better to burn around it with the fire cautery we call 'circular', as we have said in many a cauterization.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, or because of the waste the disease produces, or because the patient is very old and weak and has little blood, or because they are very young; then you should hasten their death: therefore cauterize them with a little fire by poking them with it; after that leave them alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For they will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce them all over with the fire, then heat the fire in this way:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the fire has penetrated the flesh, and make the burns so that the patient feels the heat in one way and the course of putrefaction is stopped in another way.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	with fire,
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of getting sick, which is called "corrosion," and is nothing more than a certain type of wound, as the fire dries up the members just as it does with dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a person who can be treated, then you should heat the clavy cauterizes, small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after the fire has completely burned away all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupt is bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days and put clavy cauterizes on the affected areas to keep them oiled until the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with the oil that causes blisters:
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that there is no healing, it is good; and if not, then begin again the cauterization on that which has been delayed from its place corrupt.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mengeson is never once cured of the medical fever by the fire cautery; but yet the fire cautery is of more great help, and I have already said the cure of the medical fever in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the onions that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	At times it happens that by accident a disease called "close" according to our intention comes about, and it is a big thing that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is so according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say fire cauterization, and cauterization by hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the ulcerous wound as long as it remains healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the heart is turned away by defecation, and many times it goes up and down and in hand and out piez, then it is necessary that you introduce a fire cautery; and there is a certain way: take a rope of arane or iron, or a feather of fowl, and put it on the nail and the archilul, that is to say porrels verrues; and put the rope on it so that it turns red all around, then put a little hot awel, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the rope comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep to the root; and let the patient feel a little of the pain of the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will come out all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And so do another, as long as you have extracted all those who are in the center, then treat them for the blisters that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	to shake off
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver from cold, or a quarter fever or another, it is necessary that you make them four or five cauterizes on the spine of the back, one cauterize between each spine; and one cauterize on the feet, and one above the stomach with the olive-colored cauterizer; this will stop their shaking, and speed up their recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	pustules that stink
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time appears on the body by外部的汚物，或“发出臭味的 pustules”，这是来自腐烂物质的大量物质。
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it appears at first when they appear that you make a cauterize on each head of the pustule: a fine cauterizer made from burning mirabelle, so that it burns well, or a long root of aristeology, or a lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time are they cauterized in the beginning when it appears according to this method, and they cannot grow hair before, but their excess is broken, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great disturbances of blood occur from the artery that is cut to the wound that comes to the surface, or to the incision of the abscess, or to the fire cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case, if you hurry to put your little finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it as much as the blood stops with your little finger, and no drop comes out; then take fire-olive oil, large or small, according to the wound and its place, and hold it on fire a great deal until it is all red; then pick up I, or a large or small amount according to the wound, and lay it down, keeping the cauterizer on that vein where you are holding your little finger, and keep the cauterizer on it as long as the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you feel pain when you lie down on your back, and the cauterization is done, if you take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and guard against burning the nerve that is delicate, and let no other evil come upon the sick person; and know that when the artery is cut short of its length, it cannot be well stopped even if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not yet been treated, or by tightly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop the blood; and let it be bound and stretched carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a tight binding with cloth or place burning things on it, or similar things, if he does not benefit from it, let him not do it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Et si cela arrive à aucun et qu'il n'ait pas de mirra ou de médicament présent, alors il doit placer son index sur la plaie de la veine comme nous l'avons dit, et bien étirer jusqu'à ce qu'il soit soulagé sur la plaie et sur la veine; et ne bouger que le mouiller avec de l'eau froide souvent car c'est froid quand il est mouillé tant que la sueur est congelée et épaissie et soulagée; et fais des incisions en avant de ceux dont il a besoin de cautères et de médicaments.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where fire cautery is needed, or burning medicine, and the squirts and causes and instruments and forms of cauterization; and I have placed this chapter from the lowest to the highest, and I will go through this chapter by the middle way for those who are hurt more easily than those who are wounded.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, oh dear one, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for that reason it is necessary to be very careful.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not take any foolish risks.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the ways of men come cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	For if they come from those who, because of their illness, have died easily due to the foolishness brought about by their disease, and of its great severity; and of this you must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of those who give you their meaning, and say: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is mockery.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to such people who come to you having this manner, but place more great confidence in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open without carefulness from whom you are certain, and from whom you might have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health may be converted; and he who helps you to have good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you will, may you seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in explaining by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizing fire, that I have devised for you from the beginning until the end, so that you may find more easily that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes to infants when the mouth is held too tightly; and it has never been seen that this is caused by anything else.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all of them die quickly; and it seems to me that it is worth less effort to treat it than other diseases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with fluid, and the head of the child turned inward every day until it could no longer be sustained; and the moisture became so great that he believed he was dead, and this moisture had gathered between the joint and the bone; and the joint was so twisted due to the moisture between the joint and the bone, and the abscess was small, that you should make a wide slit in the head with the edge of the knife; and let the moisture run as far away as possible; and thus, according to our experience:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has broken the bone and you see the tips of the chips on each side, and when you press it with your hand, the liquid jumps out, and it does not return to its place: then you should make three incisions along the way according to this form:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After removing the bandages and powders, put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with ointments and oils, and let the hair grow evenly, and give the patient dry meat to eat until the limb is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the width of the abscess is large and where the sharp point is; for it is never before, never behind, never on the right, and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess is wide, and where the sharp tip is; do so according to what you can do it; and guard against covering the artery; and let there be an escape of blood, so that the patient may die from a sudden flow of blood and from the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	(As for) the treatment of wounds, you must first clean them with water and salt; then apply ointment and poultices; and if there is an ulcer, you must cover it with a dressing.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "cataract" in the eye or foot, and the disease is old, and the remedy of medicine does not benefit, then the final remedy is to cauterize with what will cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Il covient donc, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d'un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l'une et de l'autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d'enche, puis cope l'une et l'autre d'un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc'a l'os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	It is therefore necessary, when you cover the eyes, that the patient touch his nose; after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then he pulls out the patient's neck with all the cloth; then he looks where the vein bites, and the veins of one and the other are after the ears, and they have been opened; then he signs the veins of the cheeks, then he covers both with a spatula sharpened on both sides, until the cut comes up to the bone, and this is done through the wide part of the nose.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been cut, then the blood keeps flowing constantly upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the touch, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, and sign the incision and cut down to the bone; and that which is put forward with blood should be six cents, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the repetition of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without any swelling, so that the apostemes do not come out, then strip the wound and bind it, and the cure with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient grindstone comes, and the catarrh is acquired, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old sore eyes and similar things, and is medicined by the ways of medicine and all that does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of their extraction is that the patient makes a second hair cut on his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not tightly clamped except in some men who are too cold; and if it is clamped, then the patient's neck is extracted from some blankets, then rub the place with no sharp cloth, and raise the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spadille where this form is:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And then peel the skin lightly until you hear the artery, then turn it up like plucks, and remove the webs that are from each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of II quarters.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then neither does it save anyone whole.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Because if it is not cut, then neither does it save anyone whole. And when the blood of VI degrees comes down to III; and since the artery is large, so that you tie it with two strong threads of silk, so that putrefaction doesn't come before the injury of the wound, and comes away from the blood; then cut off the surplus that is between the II threads at this same time, and then, if you see fit, so cauterize with the cautery cutellaire as far as the bone as long as the head is cut; and this is the operation of the muedre oevre, if the patient doesn't have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizing is help to end the moisture: for this is it of more great help to the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Ou il covient por l'extraction des arteres que om remplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l'artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l'estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n'as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d'aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l'extraction de l'artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cet cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And let there be between the two tools one inch of space, and then when you have sealed both ends, and you put a hot blade on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let the two heads be apart from each other because this fire cautery is not souded together at all; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come down from the veins that are on the forehead of the patient's head, and there is no benefit from the medicine that is applied, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel or movement if it is cold and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are burned by the heat of the tears, and are scorched by the fire of the tears, then there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et let him call the ancient 'cure for contusions', and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his or her hair or forehead; then he makes three slits in the forehead evenly according to its length; and one of these slits as two whole pieces from the tip of the forehead down until it reaches the nose, and the other two on the sides above the eyebrows, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are on the sides above the eyebrows; and take your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound should have the quantity of three fingers joined together; and prepare a piece of sponge and many pieces of cloth to wipe away the blood, then pour the spirit acquired from both sides because this is its form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And from the incision that should be on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the curd that is between the two slits up to all the medicine that is on the bone, then do the same thing from the middle incision until the other second one, and then remove this spirit completely.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If one drinks in the first cut the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very well sharp on one side, and on the other side it is dull, not sharp, and this is the shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the knife-edge cutting toward the horse at the back, and the edge is dull toward the bone, and drink it as much as it comes to the medium cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the top at the ends as much as the incision is continuous until it opens from the back, and then another part do in the medium cut until the other side; and then remove the hair evenly, and express the blood slowly for the blood taken; and then put into each cut a tent of fine cotton, and put drapelets soaked in wine and oil and honey, and keep so that the abscesses do not come; and on the third day unbind the ligature, and introduce a large amount of water, and then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is well.
dou reume des eulz	Dou reume des eulz.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Now let us begin with the hairs. When there is a chronic catarrh accustomed to it, and you see the hairs thin and small, and weaken vision and burn paper; and the hair falls out, and when this happens in an all-encompassing way, then you know that these matters and this catarrh do not come from one vein only, but from many veins, and that treatment for this is right, for this disease.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is so that you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large incision on his forehead, and another one wide apart from it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision on the left temple to the right one, and make it down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when he swallows; and when the bone is exposed, if you dip all the blood in a sponge, and then cover it between the II lips of the incision, and put cotton and linen bandages on it, and dip them in wine and oil, and don't let the apoplexy get hot; when it has been set, if you rub the bone until the char starts to come out, then cure with drying things, which cause char.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a certain way: take II parts of flower of wheat, and III parts of colophony, and make an ointment out of it; and apply the ointment to these wounds in order to stop the spread of the plague.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	from earache
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that causes earache is one of the Four: grains, beast, stone or similar thing like iron; seed, as beans, peas, and similar things; flowing liquid like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it aches in the ear due to a stone or some other thing that does not fit into the ear, and does not hurt when you put the ear to the sun,
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, pour a little purple oil or sesame oil in it, then instruct him to shake it; and when he does so, his eardrum will be torn, and put cotton or wool in the ear; and hold the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth times comes from this cure; and if it does not come out strongly, then arrange extraction with subtle needles, for there is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out strongly with the needles, it is good; but if not, then arrange extraction with the tiny hook of small double-edged weapon; and if it does not come out by this, then make a hole in the ear with an iron awl and stop up that which is inside the ear with soft wax so that the venom cannot enter with the awl; then form it strongly, for many times comes strongly as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, then take glistening from the tooth, and place it in some instrument that is suitable for this, and put a bit of cotton inside; then press the glistening on the stone or something, and force it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then you hasten to split the ear so that it splits hot and cold, and the way of splitting so that you make the sick person first with the head of the skull, and draw out blood according to the measure of its power, then place the sick between your hands and turn his ear up, and split a small split in the root of the ear into fat where it hangs; and let the split be like the moon until you come to the stone, then split the bone according to your strength, and suck it carefully into your mouth; and heal until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is grain that has gotten into him and it swells up, then administer extraction; and if he cannot pee, then administer a thin sottile sputum according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make this incision when you think the grain is moist due to moisture from the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with a fine pin and at the sewer, as we said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, therefore, when it is infected, the patient should use a strong expectorant at first, and wipe the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful on that ear where the infection is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it has burst, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it has not burst, take several pieces of stone from his thumb, towards and gently, and heat them a little on the fire; and put one into the patient's ear, and pull them from the other side, and make another hole in the ear with another stone, until all the liquid is gone, as we said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal's tooth, if it is a small tooth, such as a flea or similar, treat it as we have described in the division; but if it is a large tooth, then extract it with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have described in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear towards the sun: if there are no worms, then extract them with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the hairpin to see its shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It should be small below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the smaller end deeper into the ear according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient, and then extract the worm with the whole cable; do this often as all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to be removed, if they stop up the canal of cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise strongly as we have said, if you administer distillations which the ancient ones have experienced in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treating of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, of which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if there is silver or gold, remove it from the small openings, and above the worm for distillation; and to squeeze the distillation into the instrument of fine copper; and if you see a razor and wrap cotton around the tip, then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand carefully so that the oil is distilled or trickles out of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be heated on the fire as they are distilled in the ear; and keep them from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the lifting of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with no piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by a piercing of the wound, or by a spear that goes inside the ear, and this piercing comes to the ear sometimes completely, so that it cannot be seen; and there is never a time when it does not cause pain, and it sees well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes completely, if it cannot be seen, is a painful treatment in many dispositions, and in this one you must put the ear of the sick in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has done all this sputum of which there is this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful and chop in front of and behind all evenly, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the operation is a spear or a spike in the ear, if it holds the delicate wounds, and gently covers them, until the whole spike is made of bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the eyes are blinded in the head, then take a fine sharp razor and heat it slightly on the fire, and put it where the eye is blinded.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If the patient feels blinded in one eye and experiences a sharp pain, then pierce lightly and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a plug according to its width, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make no plug any day while the wound is still open, or take a plug and moisten it with red ointment, and powder it with vitriolic broth; and if you see the ear drain, so cover that you pull out the plug and take another plug moistened with rosin made of rose oil and wax, until the drainage is stopped; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and a cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the pain which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper stack
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Cut the roots of the herbs when they are moist and dry, so that you spread them with nail and pliers, and the copper from their roots; then put vinegar on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled off, then cauterize them with the small, sharp cauldron, and cauterize again after incision has taken place; and often peel, since nothing remains attached to its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the griddle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	are sometimes things that seem griddle-like in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is a mass of moisture that is thick in the paper above and dry; the ovraige is this: take care that the grandine does not move from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; cut off the large part, then scorch each small part lightly, then pick it up with pliers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing the paper a little, do not bother the patient; and if the fracture is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it is well; and if it is small, don't use force, for the sutures will soon close up and cause trouble.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the fracture is descending towards the ear from above, invert the paper and fix it with a few stitches, pressing from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, that does not harm anything. And when the fracture has been fixed, pour oil of salt water onto the wound and treat the affected area until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	with fat from the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is a grease that is produced in the paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and hurts their eyes greatly, and they rush to wash their faces in the morning, so that when they lie down on their faces they sleep, and the paper above their faces becomes moist due to the grease, which swells and changes appearance from the grease that is produced in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the shoulder with your two hands, and feel the exit of the neck between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of this operation is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent-like structure in the form of a circle according to the quantity of exit there is from each side, and then put it on him; and press with your two hands on either side so that the exit is gathered together within the circle; and then make a slit in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, not larger than the wound made at the opening of the vein; and cut the skin completely as you come to the exit; and in several dispositions the exit comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	So take away all a piece of linen cloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it will go; and keep so that you do not disturb in the slit, that you do not come to all the fat until you come to the oil, that you do not smear it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if he does not step out in the beginning of the cut, but rather cuts it slightly so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the drapes with water and place them on their place, and extract the bones.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put on top to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the apotheme, if the healer of wounds soothes it as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the hairs of the papers emerge without order, and are dried up, if they cause harm to the eyes, and bring about manners of diseases as do tears, and moistening of the papers and albaugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the hairs; and the cure is according to four manners: or by fire cautery all together, or by medicine water according to what it is in front, or by chapistre of cautery, and is done either by incision and suturing, or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand; if it burns, it is good; otherwise, if not, pour an needle on all thread above; and be this a margin from the paper or the hairs grow at these hairs, and follow the thread above all paper, and turn it to the razor; then take in the part desoz the paper, desoz the hairs pinching, all spatumile measuring, from the great tear until the little; then remove the thread, and place the paper a small piece of cotton and linen, and sign on the paper an image of an ear, like the leaf of mirth, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et s'il y a un tal qui a le devoir de copier une grande quantité de papier selon ce que le papier est moelleux; puis fente toute la colle sur les II lignes que tu as signifié, et commence des lou grand larmier jusqu'à petit; et soit-lui une des fendures près des poils naturez en la grossesse d’un radis, puis boutte l’oncine dans l’un des II angles dou qu’il, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II lèvres à une couture d’une aiguille à tout fil de laine sottil, et essuie le sang, et fais aerdre la superfluité des fils sur les II sorcielz à tout aucune chose gluante, si tu vois faire ce; et si ce non, si n’en ai cure, puis laisse la couture et les fils jusqu'à III jours ou IIII; puis guérisse la plaie sans couture de choses sèches et contraignantes, car le papier se relève au soudement de la plaie et à l'assemblage de lui, mais la couture est mouillée (si comme disent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sans paor; et si à une autre manière: et est que tu signies la papiere d’une figure qui soit aussi com le fuell de mirte, si comme nous avons conté, à III oncines déversées selon la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then take one who rises above the small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread, and bind it to the shape; and bind another thread of fine thread to it, and the third thread of thin thread, and join them evenly between your two hands; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have taken it, as we have told you, then stitch the two lips of the wound together with sutures, and calm it with cerottes and similar bandages; and never happens that the hair of the paper is turned: so it is necessary to use what we have said about the incision; but the sutures in one and in the other are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it is delayed, if the wound has a good appearance, then continue with the cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is healed and the paper lifted, and no more hair will grow, then make the shape of the two sores according to this figure and this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased, treat it and the hairs do not come with it, draw the chase from all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the oil; then if you draw the chase and the thread, and leave the oil there and let it rest for two or three days, as long as the hair hardens in its place and the hair grows on; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair with the natural couls, and raise it with that which you leave, until it is extended and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the porridge of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati", comes in oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens because of a wound, or a wound, or a cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to treat this is that you cut open the sore, and separate the lips from it, and put cotton inside, and keep it until it is healed; and you must not use any remedies for it that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use soft things, such as fenugreek; and water or oil heated and infused with onions, and a cloth wrapped around it, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you take care not to let it harden in the form that it was before; and the remedies we have said above are only effective if used immediately after the disease has started, so that it does not return in the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the horse that comes in water
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is called "axacrati" for short, is a natural and accidental one.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound, cut, burn and similar things; and the way of work in this matter is that you take an awl, in which there are two threads, and drive it into the shoulder, so that the thread comes out on the right side, leaving the awl in place; then remove the awl by pulling its rope, leaving it attached to the shoulder.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back according to what should be, it is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts on either side of the incision which you have made; and let the joints of the two cuts be at the angles of the incision that you have made, and let one joint be so that when they are assembled together, their shape is like the shape of a letter "I" with a cross; then remove this paper, according to the quantity that its edges are away from the cut, from that which follows the paper, then sew the two separated parts, and tie them with a different thread. Then treat with those which we have said regarding soft medicines, and bandages, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si la maladie vient de fendure ou de couture ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fendure plane des os les poils des paumes, et selon ce qui est ci-devant; puis desserve entre les deux levres d'une tenture, si comme j'ai dit; et il faut faire l'ovraige selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les saiges maîtres apparille engien de tout som pooir comment il faice revenir la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade même, selon ce qui lui convient d'ovraige et d'instruments en plusieurs dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	and the paper quickly
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Now quickly cut the paper using a blade so that the top is joined to the bottom, and do not move or make the nature of your cuts, so it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor between the paper, and lift upwards; and draw with pliers, until you have completely separated the assembly, and do not cut at all in the oily salt water, and the soft fresh water, and the chain; then place a linen tent between the paper and the oil, and place wool soaked in wine on the oil; and after three days use the chain and cutting tools again until it is completely healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I understand that the nail has two appearances: it is either nervous and resembles strong syphillite, or it is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and dried by rubbing, cannot move; both of these appearances begin to spread towards the large tear, and increase little by little until they completely obscure the vision, light, and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that the patient puts his head in the sun, then opens the nails; and take paper in your hand, then twist the nail with small movements, and raise it up; then take an awl, and I put a hair of horse, or of mare, or of ox, and thread it tightly; and double the point of the awl slightly and pierce it through the nail, and tie the nail to the thread and raise it up, and scrape all the skin off the nail that touches the nail, and then cut all the hair from the root with a fine scissor at small intervals, and leave the tear in its place, as usual; and never twist the nail around, and on the thread, as we have said; then scrape everything off the hair from the root:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l'incision giete en l'oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc'a l'autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu'il i covient tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the raw meat and break it, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of garlic and of the paste made of alumi, and leave it until the next day; then cure him as much as he needs to be healthy.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And re-set the nail carefully above it, and if you see that it is not getting thinner, then distil a little oil of garlic from your mouth into the colier made of alumi and the red colier and the thread, and stop the oil until the next day; then start the other work according to this same way, until it is all healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If no illness prevents it in the oil, as with an abscess, then milk, and first treat the abscess until it is healthy, then continue the work as before until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the limb hurts in the oil by great damage, if you stop it with a plaster, and cut off part of it and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distil in the oil red dye which is made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the cherry
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of some men's legs a red skin never grows, and wrap the prunelle and hold it with paper and turn it toward the fire, and seems like a rose of buckthorn; and continue the work so that the patient puts his head in the oil, then cut all the skin off, and do not let it be torn; then cut off the first skin, and go cutting little by little until the end, and keep in mind that you do not burn the oil with the work; and the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces to which one oste the sebel, as it is shown after this chapter. And when the incision is complete and all the skin is cut, then employ the oil of sweet almond or you distil red dye and similar medicines corrosive, and put on the oil cotton with care for the oil, so that he is assured of an abscess; and if it does not move anything, and the hot foot rises, and the hot foot doubts, leave the oil and cure the hot foot by soothing hot foot; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way cut skins are joined in the oil with this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adjust the treatment of each weak oil of the natural path; and of the accidental way, in work with iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that the member is suffering from this work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of hair
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red spots that are covered on the oil, and endure the sight of its work and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that you first see which oil is affected, and which it is not, and that there is no other disease besides the oil; so then, in a general way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then hold back those veins for a long time according to his wisdom, and make the veins subtle twice according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two oils by degrees in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, as you pull out the veins gently, wash the blood hour after hour until you see the veins come out of the oil; and be careful not to scratch the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you only catch the veins; and when you have done this, if you want, distill in the oil green and red wine so that it corrupts what is delayed in the sebaceous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot pull out all of it in that hour, then make a plaster on the oil of soothing things to calm the pain of the hairs and leave it for several days until the pain is calmed and assured of the abscess being hot, then start again according to this method that is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of pulling out:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the tube of oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	I will name it only as a fistula: if you treat it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said above, and it is not healed, then cut into the abscess, leaving the whole moisture there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then take all the instrument of which this form is made; and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be done from one end to another as a blade, like in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the bone's腐った部分上, そしてあなたの2つの手でそれを回し、あなたの手が感じるまで圧力をかけ続けます腐敗した部分は、そしてそれを行う一度、そして乾燥する薬を戻します。
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If his leg is stiff, and he has not been moved, and the iron bar is in place for 40 days, and it does not become infected and is healthy; but if not, there is another way to bring the fistula to the nose hole according to this form: and that is that you should expose the bone a second time with an iron saw, and with sharp medicines, and when it is exposed take it as in this form, and let the bar be at three angles, and the wood be thinned until the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If his leg is stiff and he has not been moved, and the iron bar is in place for 40 days, and it does not become infected and is healthy; but if not, there is another way to bring the fistula to the nose hole according to this form: and that is that you should expose the bone a second time with an iron saw, and with sharp medicines, and when it is exposed take it as in this form, and let the bar be at three angles, and the wood be thinned until the top as you see here. Then put it on the delicious bone, and keep your hand away from the oil pot, then turn all the saw over until it perforates the bone and feels the pain of the patient through his nose; and when the character becomes hard and the leg is healed, the matter comes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	de l'issue de l'huile
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the unraveling of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the unraveling of woven fabric brings about its disintegration, which can be seen as threads break and become visible; therefore, when you see it covered over, treat it like a wound by stitching it with needles in a circular pattern, double knotting the thread at each end, and wrapping it with wet linen, oil included, until the wound heals; and never restrict the wound with fabric circles,
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have a good appearance, if it pricks them with the fine needle that comes perfectly from the oil, and chases away the moist albugineous blood and removes the hairs, and cuts them off soon; then extract them so that they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowels of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but a bowel that is gathered in oil, resembling water descending, and yet it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the Ovaire is such that you sit the patient on II seats appariled and upright, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and let the bowels come up to your hairs; then lay them down firmly, and do not descend or move them, and see how the patient's condition changes as if it were alone; and know that if it does not descend, it is water, and the descent of the bowel is not apparilled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are sitting the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatumile and strike on the horny membrane with the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny membrane and the crown, until the bow is out; and when it is discharged, pour into hot oil mixed with honey, or sharp water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then is cured from another cure as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	hot oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of blades in division, and what is necessary to pierce; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands, away from light for the sun, and hold the healthy oil very tightly; then place the paper of oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; and place the point of the instrument over the crown by its thickness to a rait in that blenchor of oil at the part of the smaller larmier, then bottle the instrument called "almagda" well, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the blenchor of oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the parfont of the measure of the space which is from the prunele jusc’a the end of the noirour; and this is the crown of oil; then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the horny membrane, and then place the instrument at the level where the water is, then express one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is now given water, if he looks forward and sees the instrument in his own oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a short while, and if he is given water again in the second vessel, push with the instrument and when it is firmly set and no longer moves, gently remove the magma by turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little gem-water in it again, and leave it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on the other side the oil or else wet linen in oil and with a lot of salt, and bind with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	And, and those from our own land, let us put on common broie with a lot of salt.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If the magma cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have too thick hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so then, separate the conjunctive sine, and don't go too far with it, but make it thin, then pour in the almagest, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the bed coming forward, where he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and eat light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and let him be tied according to his disposition until three days; then remove it in that very same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put him back in the tie until the seventh day; and it is not appropriate that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is appropriate that you adapt it, for because of it the water rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When the abscesses come out, so that you pour oil before the seventh day, and apply it with a liquid that softens an abscess; and when it has calmed down, if you take off the veil and put it on his face, so that it covers any day, and stays in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then from the house slowly and slowly, and make himself comfortable there; and know that no servants should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Yak, who told us that in our country a certain medicine is made which sucks up the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in books of the ancient ones; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the appearances of the shapes of almagda, so that he who does not know them sees them; and let them be of earth properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this middle substance be in three angles acute behind.
de la char sor le neis	of the neck over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times are born or are raised various chards that seem scorpions at the mouth of the stone; and if there are such ones or not it has a characteristic charcoal, and if has a good-colored sorrel.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chards which is sorrel and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands toward the sun; and operate his nostrils, and pour the liquid on those chards, and scrub them hard; because what you can support on the spatumile subtil agut from one side, as long as you know that this char is all boney.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be covered, if you open it with the subtile and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if he comes up again or an abscess, as it should, and if it is malignant, then hasten and cauterize it as much as the wound is clean and bone has grown out of all the chards, then pour or pour easily and quickly or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If he is still unconscious, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healthy; and if moisture does not go down as it should, know that there is no room in the bone above, for the instrument does not come to cut: therefore you must put a thin thread of linen, and tie it tightly with your hands, and place between each knot or less; and make the patient bite on the string at his power, and pull on the odorant until it comes out through his nose into the mouth; and many times do this to the child for school, and this is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the top that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other top that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after another as we are doing with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make the poultice as long as you know that the new has corrupted this cloth, then treat the wound, wash the blood, and dip the cloth in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the wound immediately; make three or more days, as long as the ointments corrode all those who are delayed by the cloth; and then put a stone of plunk in some water for several days until he is well, and if there is need for medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, from which they distil oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a ring, and bring it also; and if you see it, make a closed ring, and be the instrument flat to purify the head; and I have many times on the head to keep it when they heat the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the horse's shoulder
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the shoulder neck is a disease that is called "telul", and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it can be seen with the eye; and because of this, you must cut it at the beginning, and burn the bone, then apply fire to the injury; and if you wait too long, and it becomes hard, take care that it does not change color, and has poor sensation: if not, do not touch it with iron, for it is a swollen abscess, because when it is cut, much harm is done to the patient; and the abscess is touched gently, not with fire, and you can cut all of it, if you vacuum the patient and cut without fear, and cure with dry and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	That is to say when solutions of continued duration come upon one of these jointed parts, it provides little benefit unless in certain men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if there is any of this upon anyone, so regard it that the wound is fresh throughout all its length; and then join the two lips together at a seam, then heal it as long as it remains sound; and if the lips are torn on one side or the other, then you must peel off all the parts of their flesh until they heal, then join the two lips together at a seam, and press them down, and powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and incense burned; and put over the powders a piece of plaster of strength or any other plaster at hand, and let it remain there as long as it oozes, then cure it with ointment until it is sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of joining thus: you put together with needles as I have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	of the lips with a strong hand inside the lips, resembling grains of sand, smaller and larger ones; then it is necessary that you spread the lips, cut each one individually, and take it with pincers and cut it into parts; then employ the leech after cutting the vitriol, as long as the blood has stopped flowing; and then clean them of the leech, and cure the part from dry things until they are healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	many times on the gums with a hard paste that the old man called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut it at its root, and let the blood run or the blood flow; then put on the leech vitriol or other restraining and drying powders; and if this gum returns after the incision, and many times again, if it is cut a second time, and cauterized: if it does not return again after cauterization; and these are the shapes of tools to plug.
des sordens	of the orde
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	of the teeth
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure a tooth that hurts to wait to pull it out as long as possible because this is not done without reason; for it is a very high substance until there is no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	And so when the disease is constrained by the treament, it is necessary that you are certain with the tooth pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Sometimes the pain leaves the disease, and one thinks that it is the healthy tooth, and has the tooth pulled; nevertheless, the pain does not go away because of this, until we have tried to do this to these patients; and when you are certain about the tooth pain, then you scratch the tooth with a hard twig towards the gum from all sides; then he moves it with your hands or small pliers at one time and one time, as long as they are well loosened, then he tightens the pliers well; and let the head of the shoulder be in your healthy between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After pulling the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out, then take any of these instruments and knock it in from all sides lightly, and move it so as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if his jaw is tight and stuck, then fill it with gauze where the obstruction is; and if he holds it firmly with pliers so that it does not break when extracted; and it is necessary to clean thoroughly under the gum so as to pull out the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you must take care that you do not break it, and there remains a part of it, and returns to the patient by the evil of the root with greater pains than from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you must take care not to do so as do the ignorant doctor who, through his haste and audacity, often breaks any vehicle, and does not administer what we have described; but brings about any evil by the bad roots that they delay or by the broken carriage, as we have often seen it happen; and when the jaw is pulled out, wash the hole with wine or mint and rope; and let them run away without causing pain to come again, which often happens if you employ the hole of vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, so that they do not get stuck in the first place, should be long and thick at the tips, so that they do not double up when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large members so that they do not bend when pulled, and they should be well made of iron, and they should be toothed so that they hold fast.
de la racine des dens	the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root is wet when pulled, you should put cotton moistened with oil on the place or apply it with your finger.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the roots are smooth, because then the pliers that are called 'grinders' do not seem to bite; and they should be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you should uncover the tooth entirely around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'alethi', that is to say file, this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and heavy so that it does not break, and the root jumps from it, this is good; if not, then help with all the tools, from which the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument that has two rains, from which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the Rasion of the Dens, and this instrument which seems like a big pliers, whose is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and this instrument is strong so that it cannot break, and know that many tools of dens are; and also other tools that are not accounted for; and the wise masters subtilely choose their tool themselves according to what his work and the disease show him, because there are many diseases where the old man does not teach a tool for the variety of them; and if it does not break the carriage or other bones, on which he lies, if he seeks the tools that fit him, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well held to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove; and then return him his place with medicines appropriate for him, and if he has a cavity in the bone, and it is small, then remove all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not in line with the natural shape of the jaw, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the root is between the teeth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed; then cut off the tooth; and if it is attached to the root, take this instrument whose form is like a small pick, and which is made of iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits and fits hard on the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file with a file such as this is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime that we make needles; and in lime a tooth pokes and pokes with his hands lightly every day so that it does not move until it chokes; then in the end there is no grinder to all, and its density is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the bluntness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth moves and pokes with his hands lightly every day
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth move and poke with his hands lightly every day, so that the patient cannot press on what he bites until he chokes, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, and this does not work; then you should restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and rusts, but gold never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain on one side, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the hooks between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you can clean it thoroughly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start again at the point where you started, and gently and thoroughly tighten your hand, so that it does not move. And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the shoulders of the wire to a pair of pliers, and join them together, and place them between the healthy tooth and set them so that they do not cut the tongue; and then leave them in this tight position as long as it can be held, and if they slip or run out, if restrained by another wire; if it remains and serves thus all its length, and this is the form of the teeth and the appearance of the attachment of the II healthy teeth and the II molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then if the loose tooth is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and suffering should meddle with it, and never make the shape of a tooth of a cow's skull, and put it back in its place where it is missing, and hold it as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the ring of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time is lost for the ring of the tongue that comes from nature, which must be so; or by accident of a sore swelling; and the ovraiges are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and put your head in his throat, and lift the tongue; then cope the nervous ligament of the broad, as much as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or not, and it is a sudden sore swelling, so he cuts the ligament and cope the broad ligament; and be careful that the cut is not too perfect, for the artery that is behind; and when you have done so, let the patient drink a little rose or cold water, then put a piece of linen on the tongue; and wash it every night, so that the ligature cannot hold.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood fever comes, then put the vitriol on top of it; and if it does not go away, then cauterize it with a slow cautery, which is good for it; then heal other cures until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a dark or black or hard color on it, then the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, because it is leprosy; and if it declines to yellow, and there is moisture, then pour the vinegar, and make it with a thin blade, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it does not go away to your aid, then put the vitriol on top of it until it is burned, and then return to your aid as long as you pull it all out; then lift its head up and down, and heal other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Of the throat come forth from within called "godath", and they are properly called "amandres", and when you treat them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, if take care: it is an abscess of small size and a little color, so do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either for its pain or because it could burst; but let it be until it has gone away, and then take it off, or else it would burst by itself; and if it is of a pale color, and the root is thin, you should prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check that the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the patient in front of the sun, and let his shoulders be in your shade, and the ovary is at the mouth and between his hands, and press the tongue to all the instrument, so that it is this form; and be of silver or gold as well as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And then you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the blade and put it in amber, and raise it further than you can; and do not tie anything with it, then put the bandage on the instrument, so here is the form, which seems a strong one; and yet their heads are curved, and one head is above another, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or anvil:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, take the cope with pliers, so here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be careful not to cut one edge at all, and when you have coped one of the amber, do the same to the other in the same way, and after the incision gargarees the sick with hot water, and easily and quickly, and if there is a little blood coming out, gargaree it with water or cooked pomegranates, or leaves of mirth, and similar things until the wound is healed; then heal him as long as he is well; and never cut in the throat other abscesses than the two ambers, if you cut them like the two ambers.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicated a woman with an abscess that was lodged in her throat, namely a small-sized abscess; and I had it tightly sealed up all around her throat so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway that was blocked, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had waited another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had risen two inches from her throat by way of the two small openings from which it discharged.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly pulled out some of the hair with my hand, and it grew back again, and then I cut off another piece, and then I pulled out more hair, and then I cauterized it in her throat: so she stopped growing larger; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the tear descends from the eye, and it is escaped and distant, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is big and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the hoof of the abscess is soft, and it is slim, then you should chop it; and that which is round and assembled and is not distant; and it is bloody or of a brown color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its blubber and distance, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have spoken above; then insert the awl into the eye, and twist it, and chop it with two instruments that I mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; because if you do so much, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two testicles, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has a fear of covering, then you should use fire to cauterize the pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of fire cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in your hand, and then press the tongue of the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and confound with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by employing the shape of this instrument, of which I speak here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place a lock of hair on the patient's forehead, as if it were a ring, and dip the instrument that we have spoken of or fire cautery in the medicine, and confound it with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too thin; and by using the shape of this instrument, of which I speak here: Take a lock of hair, as if it were a ring, and dip the instrument in the medicine, and press all the medicine on the lock, so that the patient lies on his side, so that saliva and spittle run out of his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat, and bleeds; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the lock for half an hour, until you see it become dull and the medicine's marks fade; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and dip the instrument in all the cotton on the cord, so that the cotton is wet with the medicine; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and rinse after III or V days or more as needed. And if you need to renew the medicine, dip the instrument again in the medicine, and after the cautery rinse it out with sharp cold water, and cure by gargling until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, save the cautery. If it is cured by fumigation according to this way, take calamus and hyssop and oreganum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put all of them or any of them in a pot, and put it there easily, and make it boil; and the pot can be well glued with strong earth, and put the instrument above it according to this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it is of silver or of gold, and let one of the shoulders be put in the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the vein through the tube, until the vein is dead; then often begin again, until the vein dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess, for many things have happened; and do not make this except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog's teeth and put them in the mouth of the sick person so that his mouth does not get too hot; for the dog's teeth do not make the vapor of the wound be very hot in the mouth, and it is good treatment together and salutary.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often times a bone or hair comes out of the mouth, or nothing at all. So you must take what you can see, and press it against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the thing; and if what is not opening up for you and remains in the throat, it is necessary to make the sick person vomit so that his food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps he will spit it up; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and you tie the sponge to it, and then drink it up; and when it comes to the right place, if it comes out hard, then pull hard; and if it does not come out of what we have said, then take the instrument of plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.
de la sansue de la gorge	to take care not to touch the epiglottis, which might prevent the instrument from entering; and do not push the bone inside; and rather let the patient suck on the instrument, so that it may relieve his pain or discomfort; if the patient swallows, or he draws the instrument out whole, evenly
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	do not use the medicine of the throat, as I said in the division, for the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, because you press the language to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, whether it is due to a small prick or to tiny claws.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if he doesn't respond, then take a stick and pour it in the throat of the sick person, then pour or blow on the stick with fire, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is bleeding all the time.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full jug of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it down, and move it with his hand often; and if soon after drinking the water feels the blood, then throw it up.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't vomit as we have said, then suffocate the sick person with ash of the herb called asafoetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the nose; do this many times, for it will help to prevent vomiting.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument, so that you can treat the throat, seems to be similar to a pair of pliers for entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a file, and has sharpness; therefore whatever it grasps does not escape. And here is the description:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of the appendix
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Mouths of appendices of abscess are, according to what this remembrance comes here from one and another in this book, and are different in perforation and in cutting; and it is in two ways, of which one is in its midst, and the other of which he has moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is because they are at the joint where they are.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess in the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the shoulder joint is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, as long as the bow is dead according to its course; and if there are those that must be pierced when they are crut, and do not die according to their course, such as the abscess that is in deliquent joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when the abscess comes out of its joints, and it is left until it dries up inside, by chance if the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, so that is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is taken from the main member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main member; or, if it is taken from the base, let it not be so that it perishes completely, but rather let it be alonged inside, and a fistula comes out; and cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you should know the time of the perforation of the abscess that is dead according to the completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the ague of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you should make the perforation as far away from the abscess as possible, and at the top of the horn, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal, where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bleed, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, if they cause pain, so that you leave the piercing until it is firmly established in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this one, if you delay the course of the blood from it, and is full of mud, and perhaps hardens the lips and deepens its pit.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess pierces according to the width of the body, according to what members need it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must provide small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many splits according to the appearance of their size; and if there are such that they split into three angles, and if there are such that they are coped like a bay leaf, as with abscesses of angles; and if there are such that they are cut into a circle, and other shapes and seemingly coped.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the hopes of the patient do not shake at all with the exit of the bow, so that by chance the patient dies and you are not concerned.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, use this ointment with great care, and when you have pricked your abscess, if it is a small one, apply cotton wool or old linen; and if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, put an ointment in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut off part of the skin on the abscess and sewed it up, then fill it with dry cotton or wool, without moisture, and leave it for three days; then apply poultices, and dress the wound as long as it remains sound.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is blood flow to your injury, apply cold water and do so quickly, and wet the cloth, and place it on the flowing area many times over.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood flow persists, apply government and remedy, and the powders that I have said to use on the wounds in this book, and if it is a deep wound, and the base of the appendage is nervous, know that you should put sheets and cloths soaked in wine and oil warm; and if it is an external injury, and the appendage is fleshy, know that you should put cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine, for three days, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and wipe and cure it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand this universally in the treatment of abscesses: but I have said to you how one must go before in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the ointment.
des soros	abscesses
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	These small sore-like abscesses are handled by us in such a way that they become threads, just as the skin of a goose does, and there are many similarities with them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and such that they have moisture as well, and some that are hard and bony at the edge, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary to it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you experience with all the instrument that is called "entre-mioche", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and it flows from above along the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, if it does not leave the hair that contains the moisture, for it returns immediately when left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; otherwise, in water and seaweeds, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and let those who are delayed run.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the cotton begins again, as before, on the second day, and the balm, until you know that it does not stay long; then cure the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess still holds water, according to this form, then let it hang; and pour your urine on it, and scorch it all over, and apply all your cure to draw out the puss from it; and if the artery is opposite, do as I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make an incision on the abscess if it is painful, and with a sharp knife and with a cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the abscess, if it is painful and moist, for it is lighter because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or nodules do not have moisture, and there are some that I have cut at the top of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard, sharp, and bleached as a large stone, it could not be broken; and if anyone had hit one, he would have made a wound as deep as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come out at the top, those that come out at the top of children and roots of ears, make an incision all the way down to the most dependent place so that the bow can be released; and treat it as required.
des scrophules	Of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times have I seen an abscess at the throat, and it drains, and it inflames, and never comes to another place or core, and is rotten, and are mingled with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its side, as the nut and the abscess at the throat, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some evil ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one which you see of good disposition in the throat, and is color like the color of the body, and mute from any part and is not deep; then it is that you cut it from above, and scar each part, and the two lips of the mouth are at the bottom as one, if you have need, as we have said in the abscess at the throat; and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and is not the spittle full nor trenching, lest the hand escape, and look too far forward, that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you operate, then put vitriolic acid on the wound, or some powder that stops the bleeding, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the plague has been calmed, if you return to your work, as long as you do it; then examine your index finger for any small sores, if they are there, cut them and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if he has a great root of leprosy, it only comes that you cut this leprosy in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then bandage the wound with cotton dipped in olive oil, and then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you catch all the scrofula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound and sew them up straight away; so that there is no delay because of the abundance of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it seems opportune to you that you listen to cover the root of him, and press hard, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulae that have too much, pierce where he is dying; and pierce in the same way as said before, when it comes to it, then apply medicine with care and similar things, so that it corrupts that which is delayed from corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, apply medicine with ointment until he is cured.
de squinance	squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the scriptural word of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	A those who have squint, it is necessary that the slit in the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", be removed; and one should not seek help from him for, because all the veins and the pormon of the sick person are at those who have an abscess warm in the mouth or in the throat or in II mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the channel of the pormon, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the death that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we split it III circles or IIII a small slit from the outside, between II circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and those are suitable for splitting the epiglottis so that there is no char, and the vessel are long of enqui.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, then let him stretch the skin of the throat to its entire length, and then split the vein as far as it comes to the chest; and avoid blood vessels, if you see none, and then apply the medicine, as we have said; and it is proven by the section of the vein of the chest that flows strongly by the place that is broken, and by the absence of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by which one doubts strangulation, bring together the II lips of the wound of the vein, and the whole skin feels the cartilage; then administer medications that make blood flow, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: 'Do not do this just yet, until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is removed.'
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then take hold of the epiglottis because so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death; and to order the elder to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And then it ordered to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young woman take a knife and put it in her throat, and she cut some of the veins; and I was called to heal her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that came from it, and I know that she had not cut a vein or an artery; the blood came out through the wound in her throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was sound; and there came to the damsel nothing but that she was red in the face, and returned to her condition; so I said that in the work of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	is called "hernia of the throat", and is a great abscess in the color of a yellow, and is much seen in women; and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; where there is no machine.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is according to two manners, whereby one is resembling to fat us, and the other manner is resembling to an abscess which comes from us of the artery; and there is fear, and it does not at all operate with fire except in that which is small, and you prove and search in all the intromiser: if you find it the same as I say, fat, and cannot at all, so deal with him well, and treat him in any way, as he deserves; and seek well early, and cure him as it should be, until he is perfectly sound.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are of us, which I will speak of all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is hot and feverish, until the boiling is passed, and the perspiration is accomplished; then rest the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With you there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it heals, which is its own juice, and is according to the color of the body, and begins also as a scab, and becomes fat; and are according to their similarities, or gray, or moist, and many colors are so as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the body, that you examine and question first all the instrument which is called "encourautoire", according to what its form will be or paste which is afterwards.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to test for an abscess is that you squeeze or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has hit the core, then it must be according to the size of the abscess; then remove the core, and take care not to miss.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running water is fresh, what color it is, then do the same as I said for other abscesses; and if after the core does not run moist, know that it is greasy, so do it in a cross way and take it with pliers, and scrape it lightly from each side and watch the cloth where it lies that you take it healthy without the knot; and if you cannot take it healthy, then take it by pieces so that nothing stays there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car s'il y a un retard, il revient souvent par des moyens inconnus; et s'il y a un léger retard et qu'il ne te fasse pas de mal, traite la plaie avec de la poudre corrosive de l'eau, tire la plaie et applique une substance apaisante sur l'apothémum, et soigne-le avec d'autres remèdes jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse; et s'il est très grave, coupe les deux lèvres de la plaie, et soigne la cause du mal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	Car si un retard se produit, il revient souvent de façon inattendue; et s'il y a un léger retard et qu'il ne te fasse pas de mal, traite la plaie avec de l'acide vitriole, laisse-le seul pendant deux ou trois jours, jusqu'à ce que la plaie pourrisse, et alors applique une solution de sang de bœuf; puis revenons à la poussière qui a causé le retard.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s'en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez "albaret", et l'un qui est apelés "breb", et s'en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchir les apostèmes de fistule; et sunt aussi com les aiguilles dont on cout les sorcelées, et sont d'airain citrin, ou de fer, ou d'argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus éprouvés de plonc noir por encerchir les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantité de la largesse des pertus.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	See here the shapes of the instruments of insertion, and they are of three manners: big, medium, and small; and there are three quarters which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb"; and there are also of three manners: big, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; and they are also like the needles used to cut sorceleries, and they are made of citrin brass, or iron, or silver, and they move easily those that are yellow, and they are more tested by black lead to encircle the corbeaux of fistula; and they are of three manners: big, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d'une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c'on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromessoires sont les alemelles reponues en mainches, si que li malade ne s'en perdroient a l'ouverture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grand, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n'en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mamelles, et anges, et semblant leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And let the chief of these be sharp, and of such ones there are who do not cut more than from one side, of which we scrape the skin, so that the vein or nerve is not cut; and of these intruding ones are the alowels returned in many, so that the sick person does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are in III ways: great, small, and medium, as you see; and we use them only in the charnel, like legs, arms, breasts, arms, and similar ones; and never do we make any other little instrument, resembling scatters of fists, according to this form, so that we stop the blood:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the breasts of some men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they look like women's breasts; and they grow ugly and swollen, and those who are to cure them should do so according to this form of the chapter from b. to g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	None of the breasts of some men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they look like women's breasts; and they grow ugly and swollen, and those who are to cure them should do so according to this form of the chapter from b. to g.: then scorch the fat, and treat the wound with medicine by soaking it, then join together the II lips of the wound at its costures, and cure it as long as it is well; and if the breast has dropped down, and is moistened by its own secretions so that it swells up, as it often does in women's breasts, if you bend it forward on two ribs above, by II apparently splits; then let one rib hold the other at the end of each, so that the larger rib contains the smaller according to this form, from b. to g.; then scorch the skin that is between the II lips, and remove the fat, and treat with what we have said about costures and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, as long as it is well; and if it is not well, or the incision is not yet completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the escape of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton wetted with a corrosive ointment; and leave it there until it has absorbed the remnant and the fat, then cure it as long as it is well.
des apostemes des asselles	of the hips of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The cysts that come from the hips of the buttocks are handled like hard scrofulous bumps or nodules, and if there is only one containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	So that those containing moisture are cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess have been emptied, if you plug it with old cotton and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles a scrofulous bump, if you cut it as we have said in the section on cutting scrofulous bumps, and if the wound returns bowels, if you apply fire cautery as we have described above.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut, and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses come with the fleeing vein and abscess; and if you know where the artery is, then the abscess will be long and complete; and when you feel it with your fingers, then you feel extraction; and when it is for the vein, then let it run apart seemingly; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and more so when it is sewn up and at the neck and mouth of others and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the artery is cut, and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses come with the fleeing vein and abscess; and if you know where the artery is, then the abscess will be long and complete; and when you feel it with your fingers, then you feel extraction; and when it is for the vein, then let it run apart seemingly; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and more so when it is sewn up and at the neck and mouth of others and is very large.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when they come from the artery and the vein, they come from the nerves when they are cut, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens to the shoulders and arms and to all their joints, and it seems like the color of the blood, and is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is held in place, if the patient feels pain, and does not fit perfectly into the bone, but changes position well on both sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and the one who is at the shoulder or forehead makes the skin crack.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a pimple, and copes it in its root; and if it is large, if the soup has an onion, and scorches it, then the bone and sews the wound with sutures, and heals it as long as it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	The large bells hanging.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	The large bell-shaped bells hanging. A disease has occurred in the belly and nowhere else, which is called "fungus" by appearance, and it is a subtle root and a large knot; and there are small and great ones; and I saw one man who had two stomachs that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had little roots, and they were torn, and kept running moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I picked them up and found that one weighed XVIII ounces and the other VI ounces, and when I cut into them so as to look at them, the patient is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist and has a subtle root; so deal with them in front of you by fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess which has become infected, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer below.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is gone
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the swelling comes from a cauterized ulcer or wound, and it is on the abdomen with some boils, as it often happens in other wounds, or blood flow from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or wind flow; and if it is by the wound of the abscess and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the ulcer is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when you press it toward its two sides it returns, and sometimes if it is stuck, and grows larger at the entrance to the canal, and by strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et si c'est à cause d'humidité, c'est une chose légère, et il faut ouvrir bien quand tu le presses à ta main, ne le contrains pas; et s'il est à cause de sang, ouvre par ces signes les apoptes gros et durs, et ils sont fixés selon une quantité; et si c'est à cause d'une windicité, il est mou dans le touylet, et l'ouvrage est tel que tu regardes que son apparence est pour la windicité de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou de la windicité.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and you should open well when you press it to your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is because of blood, open by these signs the big and hard apoptes, and they are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is because of a windicity, it is soft in the touylet, and the work is such that you look that its appearance is for the windicity of the artery, or of the vein, or of the windicity. If it comes that you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter, there is doubt and fear, as I told you before about the chapastre of the apoptes, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bile, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dye his hair, and let it hang straight down, then mark all around the bile; then command him to cut generously between your hands, then go around the area that you have marked with all the skin; then tie the half of the appendix firmly with a strong thread or a rope made of strong silk, and keep it in place; then operate on the half of the appendix extended over the string, and grip the index finger, and feel for the intestine; if you find it attached to the string, then release it, and push the intestine towards the end of the abdomen; and if you find the bile, then take it with the uncine, and cut away the excess; and if the artery opposes or hinders, or if there is a vein, then go softly around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two fils through them, and push the needles into the area that you have made a hole in; then strain the appendix in four legs on top of the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the area until it is rotten and black, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or when it becomes thin and rotten, then cure what needs to be cured, and cut off the appendix as we have said; and extract the blood or the moisture that you find, then cure the area of what needs to be cured, and solder the area.
dou chancre	dou kans
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	dou kans
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedures, when in place and可操作的, should be that you purge any black bile from the patient once; then make the patient well by applying a poultice if it is mild, then cut off the hair, and clean all parts of the wound and bone with nothing left behind; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the jugular vein or the veins with your hand or anything, and let the bile flow out contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if it is cauterized until the stain is removed; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	about dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	About dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Is be cut from both sides. A sharp point, and always cut so that it does not go into the intestine when inserted, otherwise it may get stuck; then look whether the dropsy is caused by a disease of the liver or by mucus. If it is caused by a disease of the liver, cut to the left of the bowel, and if it is caused by mucus, cut to the right, and do not let the liquid run into the weak part; then pierce the skin with the instrument, and squeeze, and hold your hand over the spatumil as you would scrape off something with a scraper according to the quantity of an inch or more; then pierce the spatumil until the liquid comes out, and this is the source of the liquid, then pour it away, and hold the instrument in this way:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it looks like a silver-colored ring, and is made of light bronze or copper, and in the center there is a small hole; and on one side it has three holes, and on the other side two, and on the other side one; and the head is cut off as if with a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the pen with.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And the tool is located on top, so that when the instrument comes to the water, pour it out now on the instrument; empty half or a third of it, because if you empty more than it is appropriate at that time, by chance the patient dies because of the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he knocks his head, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick and his脉 mean; then move the tool and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the key that stops the hole that is on the medicine, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce it in this way; then restart the tool another day, if you see the patient suffer, and move on the water a small amount; do not repeat this, and keep yourself from wasting too much until it stops.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Et s'il doute du maladyen, et lui donne de l'eau, que le guérisseur de la sepulture ou du sable soit chaud, et par sueir ou bain et au soleil, et qu'il devienne noir de boire; et que le guérisseur de médicaments séchés soit jusqu'à ce qu'il soit sain, et qu'il cautérise sur l'estomac et sur le foie et sur la rate après l'extraction de l'eau, comme je l'ai dit ci-dessus.
de l’estopement de la verge	The prevention of infertility through vasectomy
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There is no child born who does not have a defect in the penis, or if it is small, or if it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is convenient that he should not pierce all the delicate skin according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place the subtile spike of lead and secure it and keep it there for three days or four, and when it begins to urinate, if it is stopped up, let it urinate, and then release it; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the closure.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He who has a protrusion should not drink wine if he has a pus that is thick, as we have said, or if it spreads out.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	He who does not have the protrusion in his natural place is blistered, for there are none who have the protrusion at the top of the penis, so that he cannot urinate unless he raises his penis; and he cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come out as far as the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of this work is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the scrotum are as big as a feather; if the protrusion hits in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the discharge of blood, which often comes, and if it happens, let the one who stops the blood heal the wound until he is well.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis pustules
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times there are pustules in the penis, and it has an ugly appearance; and there are good and bad ones; so that you should squeeze them with gentle pressure, and cop them and clean them all up, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on them; then treat them with diafinicon until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the penis is malignant, of putrid color and foul smell, then you should apply a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it up, and the penis is inside the foreskin, and there is some of it inside the skin and some outside, then you should cut off what is inside first; and when it is sewed up, then treat it.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, unless the head of the penis is not firmly attached, and there comes blackness and corruption into his penis and scrotum; then you should cut off all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with plaster made from honey and flour, which is made from pomegranate peel and grapes, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: For the cure of the corruption and removal of the cord; and if the foreskin is corrupted and withdrawn, let there be applied to the head of the penis a string of leather, and urinate on the patient; and when the hair has been shaved at the head of the penis, which was caused by wounds or abscesses, then it should be carefully scraped with an instrument like a scalpel, until the ligaments are loosened and the foreskin removed completely; and if it is not convenient to speak of this, let it be scraped with a sharp blade from the head of the penis and the skin, and then sever it sharply, and wrap a thin linen cloth dipped in cold water around it so that it does not scar.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not a distraction from the rest if it is like other wounds; however, when we do this work by our will and especially on infants, it is necessary that we do it with more skill and less effort for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old people did not mention circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only acquired this by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the most respected and knowledgeable people who perform circumcision between the thigh and the testicles, and it is difficult for them because there are two skinfolds, and perhaps one of them will catch fire and burn.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And if it is covered again, the pain is doubled, and the cleansing from the foreskin of the member is not assured; and perhaps the nail escapes, and disturbs the work, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleaning, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the washings which are made to all the body I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the washes cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you squeeze your hand, cut it evenly across the whole body; but the thread should be well fastened around the leather; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think that you are only tying the thread tightly around the root, and then allowing it to slide in all directions as you can; then put it between your hands straight, and rub the washes between your hands or dry them, and swing it upward so that the joint of the root is facing up; then wash it well with the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the thread tight with a double thread, then lie it down on top of another thread; and hold it in place with the second thread at the thumb and index finger, and wrap it between the two threads; then lift the wash gently upward and turn the root; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the bleeding; and powder it with powder and wrap it in a drape of glue made from a mixture of dried rosewater, confited with good oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the next day, and cure it with other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for cleaning if this is: both shoulders are soft and carved out, and the shoulders are also as long as the hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the cleaning if this is when the cure runs out through the incision; so it is necessary that you extend it to your nail, so that the edges form an abscess, and equal it, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then bandage.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it has passed three days and that which is sore at the root of the penis is swollen, let him leave until the abscesses are cleaned out, and the skin is slightly dried; if you can move it so, and keep away from the part of the penis, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat with powder on the part that is sore, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you bandage it too much, and it goes up, it will not harm him; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	dou retenement de l’urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retenement of urine is due to a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowels, or char, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not flow, and you see the retenement for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent on his knees; and let him be placed on his back with his feet extended behind his back, and make the patient restrain himself as much as he can; and then constrict the base of the bladder to the expression of the stone above, so that the urine flows; and if it does not flow, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should bring about extraction with all the instrument which is called a "syringue", which has this form: and let it be made of fine lightweight silver, like the feathers of an owl; and let the tube be half a palm long, and fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take a double thread, and bind at the top with wool or cotton, and bottle the top with the thread inside the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and bottle it up to the top of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; then put the syringe lightly into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upside down above the bottle; then bottle the syringe before the bladder, and have the patient go to the empty thing, and that is not done according to this order but because that which you lead him or she goes there is twisted; then take the thread all around the bound wool, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it forcefully, and make the urine run; and begin again with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is made even.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the scorching or fever enters into the bladder, or putrefaction is present therein, and you see that there are water and medicines, so do with all the instrument which is called "clepsydre", and this is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three apertures: one on one side, and another on the other, as you see; and let the head of the instrument be such that the medicine which is to be injected stops well in the bladder without any addition, so that the moisture can be withdrawn, and put when necessary; and when you inject your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw while pulling it; if you draw the moisture into the syringe, and then push it with force back into the bladder; if it will enter the moisture into the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the shape of the delicate clyster with which they clisterize the bladder: it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d'un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenantment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n'as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d'oile et de moistor et d'aigue, et le lie en l'estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines; and I said the difference between a stone stuck in the bladder and in the member, and as to what size a stone should be, and about the bladder and penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is stuck in the bladder often comes out with children, and this is a sign that the liquid in the bladder seems to be like water in its subtlety; and I open it, and massage the patient's penis, and turn it many times, and then it gets tighter; and the foundations are melted; and the recovery from this jump is lighter in children up to the age of four, and it is much heavier in old people, and it is moderate between teenage and elderly; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the waste matter which is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he never wants to try cutting into stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take hold of the patient by the feet, and pull him upside down and move him to the place where the stone is located at the bottom of the bladder, and never cut into it from above; then make him sit between your hands, and his legs be also drawn back so that the bladder hangs down; then feel inside; if you can feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut into it on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out when you touch it all over, then wet your little finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old and infirm, or use your right hand; and press at the bottom, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, feel for the neck of the bladder; then squeeze gently, and push down on the spot where you feel it.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and he commands that he extends to his right hand the sacs above, and with his left hand he holds the skin which is behind the sacs in the part where the waist is made; then I pour the spatumil, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And open between what is between the sacs and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left waist; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two sides are joined to the foundation, and let the cut be through the navel so that it is wide from the outside, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps the press if that which is at the foundation, that she should go without work; and know that there is a piece of stone where there are angles and edges: this is difficult to remove; and if part of it is smooth, resembling a ring, and round, its exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A cell so choose where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not [break], so that you can extract with tweezers which are also like a file on the head, to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you squeeze with your fingers a fine corbied instrument on the head; and if you can not catch it so, so it is wide a small hole, and if it is peeled, so extract the vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first squeeze the largest at the neck of the bladder, then continue, then move strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, so that it is convenient to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes again quickly because his veins cannot hold it; but nevertheless you push to extract, or to tear with tweezers, until you extract it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, if you employ the encensement with balm and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and put on top a wet drape with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water to calm the abscess; then cut off the patient's hair from his neck, and do not untie the bond until three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if there is a lot of oil and water, then treat with unguentum de finigo and unguentum basilicum until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come out in the wound and corrosion, and frosts of blood in the bladder, and is held back by urine, which is conveyed in a certain way so that it does not jump with urine: then you must put your hand in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it out; then raise the wound with water and air and hemp, and help it in all ways that you can until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all hours that you cure him, you tie his legs, and bring medicines to their place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is located in the bladder, and stuck there, and urine cannot come out; if you treat him as I said above, that you cut many times, it is excused from cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tested this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I before you work with this mold and make it with three angles inserted into a log:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and polish the edge of the stone, so that it cannot come out from behind the stone; then push the bit into the stone lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the bit in your hand little by little, as far as you can bore through the stone from the other side; and soon enough the urine will come, then press your hand on what is delayed behind the stone that is inside the bit.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed; and if you cannot do this in any way that harms it, then I will polish the stone and another on top of it, then remove the bit between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, and wash away the frozen blood that is in the wound; and heal it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	there is a stone in women, and if it ever happens, there is great danger, and it is defended by three things: the first is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to treat herself when she is pregnant, even if she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to treat herself in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in women is more perfect than the stone in men, so that it needs to make a deeper cut, and there is much fear of it. And if necessity demands it, you should find a wise midwife, and lightly [if] she does not help him, then do not [do anything], but rather I will go to a castle in a subtle way; and present her an able midwife in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and order her to do what you command her in the interrogation of the stone; and watch very well whether this woman is virgin: then it [is] necessary for her to push her thumb or foundation and want for it, and she recommends that she pushes her thumb into the malady, and she wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she bleeds, then it is necessary that she moves slowly from the entrance of the bladder to the anus, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then chop on the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle where the instrument is placed, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her two legs above the stone or anus, and make a small cut first; then press on the loins, if you feel the stone very sharp to the wound as far as the stone can come out, and know that there are many ways of stones: that is to say, small and large, and sharp and rough, long and round, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the similarities so that you can tell the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not go well for you, put the vitriolic brooch on it, and keep it an hour until the Sans is bleached; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have the tools that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone to men to help you in your work; and if it does not go well for you, it is of the artery that has been chopped, put the powder on the root and strain the water and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, that by chance the patient dies; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire has subsided, and the blood stops flowing, return to your work, as long as the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia (hernias)
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Is not the water of life but a mixture of white fluid and fat that is present in the navel, which is called “syfac,” and is never truly found within the navel itself, if one believes that it is another substance; and this is the fat of the navel mixed with the white fluid that we have mentioned; and that does not form a solid mass.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the origin of this hernia is so weak that it arises from the navel, and this matter is spread out widely.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And this mixture does not change color: or it is yellow-white, or red-white, or black, or water-white, and so on; and these are the signs by which we know this mixture: for if it is white  as mentioned above, then it is a swollen appendage, like an organ, and does not close up the navel, because it is moist all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the cloth itself, let the abscess be cut with part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white syphillous, then feel it well; so that when you know the color of the moisture, try all the inside quarter by quarter, whereby its form is above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, who comes after the quarter, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with fire, let the patient be made well according to his power and the repletion of his body; then put him on his back on something high, and wrap him in blankets; then sit on his left side, and command the minister that he sit on his right, and spread the cloth over both his legs; then take the scalpel, and cut the skin of the testicles among them until you reach the long bone underneath, and be your cut all straight by dividing the skin of the testicles little by little according to his power; then pierce the white skin with water at a wide hole, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers, and stop up the hole upstream; and if the egg should jump out at your work, return it to its place when you have finished cutting the skin of the testicles; and if the egg had jumped into your work, then take it back again; and if the egg should be in his place, but the skin be cut, so that the egg should drop out, then put it back in its place, and cover the hole with a patch; and if the skin has been cut and the egg has not dropped out, then cover the hole with a patch, and bandage him like the other wounds until he is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg is corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of the corruption of blood; then take out the yolk from all the suspension, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled into two parts together, knowing that these are two ramies; then take out the other part as you did with the first one equally, then wash the blood, and put on the wound another damp cloth in oil rosin; and put away another damp cloth in wine and oil, and put the two yolks, and put double drapelz on top, and tie it all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two drapelz, and make them of damp cloth according to this form and let them be assembled by stitching into the girdle of the braies, and one of the heads preigne on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the claw; and the other two chief on the two angles, and is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the braier; and no medicine this ramie of cautery in place of a iron size, and it is that you preigne the subtle cautery of fire, and take the skin of the yolks, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syrup that contains the blood is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white syrup once, and scorch with this subtle cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut in all ways that you can, until you remove all of it; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this operation is safer; and take care to prevent blood loss and cauterize wounds; and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or blood loss or something else, treat what makes you uncomfortable according to what has been said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid and does not wait for this operation because of its horror, then make a perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the rancid water is there, then place the patient on a raised seat; for then the abscess will open in the part below the sputum, and insert the perforation long from the heart; and make the opening large so that all the water runs out; then put cotton on the site, and bind it, and leave it to run out the remaining water, then treat as long as the wound heals; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the wound's mouth, then you must put a feather or the instrument used to remove the water from the dropsical into it, so that it forms as I have said above; and widen the wound slightly, and know that the water returns and is gathered after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, and so the patient's days pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I know that in this chapter there are many things to fear, so I think it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the procedures for dealing with an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the testes, and most often from the testicles; and this is due to moisture.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be understood: by acrid and bitter moisture that spreads into the testes, or by impact; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the testicle; and it does not cause pain, but it is a grief for the abscess; and perhaps there is an abscess that is painful and dangerous, and of a strange color, and never comes from any artery, or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, if you know by the hotness of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it only comes that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux, et peut om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocation of the shoulder can be caused by moisture, and when it is reset but cannot stay in place, it can repeatedly dislocate with slight movement. First, you must reset the dislocation. Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, causing the limb to be misaligned and causing the patient great pain and injury.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the chip is at the back, you must cop it all, and extract the chip, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your works are finished, if you employ the wound with wet wool wrapped in oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the scrotum
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a treatment for the scrotum involving wrapping it in a fabric of similar appearance to a cloth, with the coions softened, and the patient grumbles less when he moves; and the treatment for this disease is well known from what the old man did, and we will tell you the work of him according to that.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a soft seat, then dip the suspender of the coions in water at both ends, all the vessel that are near the penis, and dry them thoroughly; then cut off each part with a sharp knife as we said when extracting the arteries that are in temples; then put a needle into it with double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and quickly tie it to the other end; then join them in a straight line according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as you would with others where one vessel bleeds, so that no vessel loses its blood because of the incision; and let them dry and not be able to help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	about the wound of the eye
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	about the wound in the eye, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angers, because the intestines descend from that wound to one of the loins; and this wound is either from the section of the syph, or of the extension thereof, and these two ways come from causes: from percussion, or leap, or braying, or lifting up pain, and similar things; and the signs when it is of the extension of the syph, if it is that it comes little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the apostemes are equal until almost the end, so that the syph hurries the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	and the signs are when it is of the section of the syph, that it brings about sudden pain, and the apostemes are different appearances, detaching the skin there, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the course to the end of the syph.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never let the intestines descend with the circumcision, and is held back, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	For in these treatments of iron to frighten, for it is necessary to wash away.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of the circumcision is that you command the patient that he keep the intestines in his hand at the bottom of the wound, if he can enter; then is it necessary to wash away very well with water. Then take two fingers of your right hand and place them on the skin around the wound, and peel back the skin as far as possible; then bottle the blood from the abdomen into a cup, and take care not to let any blood fall; then pour the blood onto the skin that has been peeled, making sure that it covers all sides; then bottle your index finger in the place where the skin was pulled away, between the white skin that has been peeled and the skin of the scrotum, and between the second white skin, and behind the skin of the scrotum, and between the second white skin; and with your right hand, press down on the skin below the cup, and take the white skin that is above your left hand, and squeeze the blood from all sides onto the skin; and command the minister to extend the blood in front, and tie what remains of the skin. Then cut a piece of thread as thick as three threads made from 30 threads, and bottle it in the back part of the white skin, which is behind the skin of the scrotum; then tie the thread around the skin, leaving two loops at each end; then wrap the ends of the threads around the skin and tie them together, so that no thread remains that might be eaten by the lice that live on it, and allow the wound to drain; and after this, cut a piece of thread as thick as three threads made from 30 threads, and tie it at the top of the skin that has been peeled, leaving a loop about an inch long; then wrap the ends of the threads around the skin and tie them together, so that no thread remains that might be eaten by the lice that live on it, and allow the wound to drain; and after this, cut another piece of thread as thick as three threads made from 30 threads, and tie it at the bottom of the skin that has been peeled, leaving a loop about an inch long; then wrap the ends of the threads around the skin and tie them together, so that no thread remains that might be eaten by the lice that live on it.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And there is no time when the white blood is cauterized that we have said, after the incision, through doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leaves the ligature as long as it bleeds on its own; and if it delays bleeding, then raise it with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it bleeds; then cure the wound with other cures until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnose
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to try to make the cure with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old one said that it is made thus: as you join the rope together, in a similar way tie the vessels after cutting lightly on the leg; then tie it up and cure the abscess of whoever performs it, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes without injury to the arteries, as we have said, and open them up; and do not let any of the intestines hang out with the coils, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; but nevertheless, if he stays too long in this place, so that the wound or gangrene believes him, until the intestines hang out; and such happens by the extension of gangrene which is to the arteries, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and inflated up the openings, and opening them up; and the cure is with fire, as we have before said; and never is cured with iron in this way: but let the patient lie easily on his back between your hands, then take the place of the injury by the large according to the quantity of III days; and then remove the gangrene which is from the skin that follows, then take a string and put it over the place appearing from the gangrene; and press it perfectly on the belly, then cut the two appearances from the gangrene on top of the string, and cut them both; then remove the top of the string, and do not cover with gangrene or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you fix the threads, if the wound is well-cured until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The cure is necessary, and does not have an appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is moistened at that place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the cods
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Several times the leather of the cods is softened in some men, because the hairs that are within are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when you want to cure it, that you make a draw on the back of the animal, and cover the leather which is softened on the natural leather; then join the two lips with one seam, and cut off the superfluity of the leather that has been softened in three or four seams firmly; then sew between the seams, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healed, and weave it.
dou chastrement	Dou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that cauterization is done according to two ways: either by attraction, or by a cut.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water, until the joint is softened and relaxed; then grab it with your hand, so that you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: il convient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions à ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef à I cop, lorsqu'tu les auras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc du siac et lou subtil siac qui est sur les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que celle qui est faite par attraction, pour ceu que à l'attraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu'elle soit sanee.
des hermofrodites	Of the chastisement of the waist: it is fitting that you tan the bestial, and press the leather of the testicles to your left hand, then tie the suspension, and bind each oaf to I cop, when you have well scarred them; and leave no hole of the sac and subtle sac which is on the vessels; and this manner of chastisement is milder than that which is made by attraction, for since attraction may fail by chance and no part of the testicles remain attached, by which the bestial desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to two ways as men: the one that is between the two crotches open as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes the urine is cut.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has on the loins hair also as a penis and two crotches.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of the man and the woman is that you copulate the virgos opened all, and cure them so as others wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps by the skin of the crotches, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tentbug
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	is a virgo opened on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it also great as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you take the superfluity of the tent bug to your hand or oncines, and cope lightly; and do not go too much em full, that it runs away with blood, then the cure of another cure as long as he is sane; and to a different virgo that comes out at the mouth of the marris, and employs, and by chance jumps out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the «old disease kowee».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to split it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic behavior
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is erratic when nature in a woman is not yet discerned, or when the hunchback is small; and is determined by birth, or happens through illness that has come about; or is through charioteering, or through subtle or poisonous substances, and is perfected in marriage, or in costings, or seedings, or whatsoever; and the ability to conceive, and childbirth, and perhaps the growth of flowers, too; and the knowledge of this one is through the aspect of bail.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	For if it is close to the appearance of stork, whether it appears on your two hands or on the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is through subtle or poisonous substances, and it is close to the appearance of a stork, whether it appears on your two hands or on the right side. If it is through subtle substances, and it is close to the appearance of a stork, whether it appears on the pages of a book, or if you hurry, and then turn it inside out: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two pages, until the subtle substances are dry, and the stork-like appearance is complete; then take wool, and moisten it with oil, and put it in place, and let the woman lie on her back every day, so that he cannot hold her down.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it is hard and thick, then you must combine it with the liquid that looks like moss.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stinky and dirty, then hang it by the hair and dip it; and apply medicines that stop blood, as in the case of dragon's blood, incense, together with honey, then put a large cotton rope around the wound so that the wound cannot close; and let it be for a long time, and put on a linen bandage; then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the wound begins to smell bad, if you cover it in this way, then except for abscesses, they will not get infected.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For abscesses that are in the genitals, one must not apply fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	are openings of veins, and when they are old, they become thorny; and we have spoken in the division of signs of lice, and I will now say here those that bring healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the hernia, when they are completely in the womb, and do not feel except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the womb, one can feel them, are those who can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then bind the belly with thorns, and wrap it in roots of herbs that restrain blood, as well as dragon's blood and incense and similar things; then pour water on its feet for an hour, and then put it in cold water; and if the blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and confound it with honey and so on, and make an ointment with it and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if it doesn't, with the help of suction cups on the back and without hurting them; then take another one, and with juice from plantain or from wild grapevines mixed with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, to cover the place with ointment until it is healthy; and what is called 'aloe' is red, and resembles a sharp plant, then cover it as I have said in the recipe; and then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the breasts
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	come in the breast, as if it is a cancer and an abscess of the bone and the herpes and the gangrenes and the boils and the fistulas and the hemorrhoids and the chili-like abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I die in this treatise the apoplexy who comes in the limb, which is not an apoplexy but a bowel twitch; and if you know how to work with iron, you will see that the apoplexy is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die while the pain is relieved; and then make it sit on II seats where it leans, and supports its leg; and let its knees be spread out, and tie its braids behind its knees, and bind them firmly with a good rope; then suck its breath towards its right side, and introduce the instrument with which you work on the mouth of the limb, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you put the hook first to see the depth of the limb, so that what enters into the instrument does not come in more deeply than it should, and does not wound the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover its depth with cloth, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top, and wet it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and the hand is made soft, if it is necessary to cover the head, lead to the spittle; and when the bowels are empty, if it is necessary that you put in the wound wet tents in oil of roses or in green dry oil; and place the tent outside the wound at the full of the marrow, and place on the side of the marrow and on the other hand net wet with water or pomegranates are cooked; then the cure after two days of poulticing coming to this, as long as it is healthy; and no time raise the marrow and the wound by cupping of water and honey, and then of water or roots of licorice and arnica are cooked; then recover to the poulticing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed in the marrow, you must refrain from cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The art of midwifery is first to know the natural shape of childbirth, and the signs thereof, if thou seest the woman press down within her, and yearn to smell the air: then hasteneth the child forth with a light pressure upon her belly; for when it cometh forth by her head, and with it the second child, then knowest thou that the birth is according to nature, and that the issue goeth out from her navel, and the second child with him, and that the married man rideth himself of his excesses by a good purification; but if this cometh not forth in such wise, then comeeth it not naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it cometh not oft times upon its feet, and cometh from the breast or shoulder, or hands, or sometimes upon her belly, or often, and is turned by aventure upon her neck, and in other ill-shaped ways; therefore it behoveth the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how she must aid it.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If a man falls on his head because of a natural fall, and the woman gives birth to a baby with pain, and the virtue of the man is weak, so that when he sits on a saddle or women hold him; and rise his essence of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then pour the milk between his two small spatumiles whose shape is here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If a man falls on his head because of a natural fall, and the woman gives birth to a baby with pain, and the virtue of the man is weak, so that when he sits on a saddle or women hold him; and rise his essence of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then pour the milk between his two small spatumiles whose shape is here: and split the second, and pinch his nail until the moisture that is in it runs out; and hold the belly of the woman until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, it is appropriate to clisterize the woman with fenugreek musk with oil of Sisament; then make her drink and shake off the water, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: so now the baby.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Et si les deux mains sont fortes, il convient que tu les ramènes doucement peu à peu; et si elles ne peuvent entrer, met la femme sur un siège, et lui relève les pieds; puis démarre le siège du sol, et étends la femme, pour qu'elle ne trébuche pas en se levant; et si les mains ne peuvent entrer, et l'enfant est mort, si on leur applique un couteau qui est ici placé, et extrait l'enfant, et le ramène également.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	and if the issue of the child is on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up on its feet, then it is convenient to turn it over; and then turn it little by little until it is even; then press down on its feet and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can't he jump just as high as his knees, if you order him to bend, and make him shake with fear; if he jumps too high, may God help him.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we have said, then let it be done little by little, so that it may be according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For now it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For now it is light. And if it does not come as we have said, then take musculla (a type of muscle), oil of sisa (an ancient medicine), gum that has been melted, and grind them all together in a mortar; and put this mixture on the woman's nature within and outside this poultice, and then let her sit in warm water until her ribs are soft; and when she is moistened, let her take the collyrium (a type of eye medicine) made of mirr (spikenard), and let her drink it, and let her sit for an hour; then let her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and squeeze her belly lightly, for now the child will come.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the baby comes in this form, put the basket on his knees little by little; then support him on his neck, and hang his legs down, and let him lie on the bed; and fold his hands little by little, and then take them to his belly, and hold the cords behind, until he is completely delivered; and the baby does not jump, if it grabs its feet and changes its shape, then it changes its belly above, then it puts your hands; and bring the baby little by little; and tell the woman to lean back as the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the delivery of the child who comes wide a hand hanging
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	If the hand cannot be brought back, then let the woman get up and go; if she cannot go, then let her lie down on the bed, and bring her legs together; then bring the muscle relaxant that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and bring the child according to his natural form, and make him sneeze, and tell her to lean back as the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's delivery from his neck, and had spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I command that the bailiff hold his hand, then turn it little by little and gently; and when it is even, he puts it on the muscled nature of altae and oil, as we have said, then he orders her to move little by little; and when you have done this, if you place the face on a chair, and he commands her to lean; and the face shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes in this way to all the second part, if the fire has become empty; and if the child is put on its face and neck, so that it does not stay there, and dies the child; then put the child inside, until you have done it as it should be done, and order the woman to lean back once: and then do it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	That twins are born many times, and never three or four at a time; nor is it an odd thing, nor has it ever happened before.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an odd thing, and do not live long, if they are alone; but I know that if they are multiplied, they are devised by the doctor who is near the bad one; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they are born with difficulty, as we have said before, and the doctor is subtle, and does what he can quickly and lightly; and do so that it may be for his salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No child is ever formed in the womb of one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the wise Lord, and the doctor knows everything; for sometimes it may be an odd thing; so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	If the woman is dead of childbed, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to use your hands; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound health, and she has no accident or she might die from it; if it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs are raised and her feet turned towards heaven; and the minister covers her with two sheets, or she is tied to the bed so that she cannot be treated at the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oils made with althaea and fenugrec and flax seed, then oil her hands with these oils and these musclys; then pour them into the mouth of the pregnant woman slightly, then want it or let him take the swaddling clothes that are suitable for this, and put him on his head; then put the swaddling clothes in his hair or in his neck or in his mouth or in his throat or near his ribs, and the descent is on the feet, if he takes or holds it at the cost of his hands; and it is necessary that he tie the swaddling clothes to his right hand, and place the bundle between his two left hands, and pour them all over with his right hand slightly, and put the swaddling clothes in any of the places that we have said, until it comes out to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the swaddling clothes:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then place it between two others, or the tier is in need of it, so that the extractions are equal; and then make them equally with a movement from one side to the other, so they move out, and make the teeth of the onces by so holding them, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part of it stays, so treat with oil both of its two sides and squeeze them in that part, and draw the other part; and if none of it stays, then put this oncene or higher up; and make like this until all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot bring it back due to the tightness, then you must wrap a sheet over it until all is out; then cover in the joint of the sole or at the neck, and so must you do on the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is in the birth canal, or it has a sharp head assembled, then it is necessary that you squeeze the thorny spit between your two hands, and cut off the sharp one; or pull it out with the instrument which is called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or paste that follows this; and in the same way make the child's head large naturally; and then pull the bones out with tongs, and the child's head jumps out and is pulled by force, so let it be cut, as much as the moisture that is at the exit runs; and if it cannot come out, then split it into pieces with your fingers; and if it is swollen in the belly or along the sides, then it is necessary that you pierce it as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he falls on his feet, then is the light attracting, and the adjustment to the mouth of the mare is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If he falls on his belly or chest, then cover him with the cloth wrapped around your hand; and turn the belly or chest until the moisture that is there comes out; and if another member is dislocated and does not move, then pinch the mare's mouth with your hand firmly and pull it out; then either tie it or cut it, and treat it; and if the mare's mouth is shrunk by an abscess that has come to it, then do not work, but apply moist and greasy things; and apply plasters, and slice in water that is softening and moisturizing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If he falls on his back and you can make it even, then apply what we have said to the live child; and if one cannot do that, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, bring the person who has this illness that we have spoken of in the chapter about the abscesses that come with the mare; and if the blood comes out, let it be restrained with water, and other treatments are brought to it.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had died inside her, then consulted another person on that, and another one refused to treat it.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the abscess opened up, and it swelled greatly, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called in to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a poultice of strong attraction, and it came out with a bone, and after a few days others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for the mare's womb does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to look at the wound, and in doing so I injured myself, for a long time afterwards; it was only then that I remembered this unguent, for whenever a master would examine an unusual thing, he knew how to use it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	This is followed by the description of the form of the pressor, and how to bend the arms; and at two turns are the shoulders of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the corners should be thinner than the restrainers, and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the pipe should be wide enough, and the margin of the branches should be long by a palm and a half; and these two connectors should be joined together at their ends, making them about a palm and a half long; and these two joints are to be inserted into the mouth of the armature in order to open when the corners are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, à sa ressemblance plus subtile et plus légère, soit faite de fuste d'ébène ou de buis, selon l'apparence des tenaille; et ait à II chaise II ajouts, si comme tu vois, d'une paume de long, et II doigt de large; et lorsqu'tu vois ouvrir la marre à tout l'instrument, si fait s'asseoir la femme sur le lit, les pieds pendant et les jambes ouvertes, puis boutte les II ajouts ajoutes ensemble en la marre, et tien le chef de l'instrument désos entre ses cuisses; puis ouvre ta main à tout l'instrument, si comme tu as fait aux tenaille uniformément, selon la quantité que tu vois ouvrir la bouche de la marre, jusqu'à ce que le balancement fasse ce qu'elle veuille.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This is another form, of more delicate and lighter appearance, made from ebony or boxwood timber, according to the appearance of the pliers; and it has II ajouts at each end, as you see, a palm long and II fingers wide; and when you see open the socket to the entire instrument, so that the woman sits on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then button up the II ajouts together in the socket, and hold the handle of the instrument between her thighs; then open your hand to the entire instrument, as you have done with the pliers uniformly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the socket, until the swing makes what she wants.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I do not have the instrument, do not put it on me, for their need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second one is held back from childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the woman to retain her semen, and then make it spurt out with contraction, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she vomits because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not happen, I can take it, and make a vessel or cup out of it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, as aniseed, rue, fennel, chamomile, cassialign and centaurium; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then one end is placed in the vessel, and the other in her mouth, and she is made to spit out the vapors that come into her; then she is made to spit up, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it jumps the second time.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If it remains after this cure and is not well, order the bailiff to moisten his left hand with oil of mint or with musk from Alto, and then let it rest in nature, and then try again; and when you have found it, if you pinch it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the marrows do not break at the extraction; but you must move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out. And then it will come off.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the marrows is stiff and hard to extract, we have already spoken about the cure of sweating and the use of herbs; and if it is only this that you have said, be careful not to mess up when you draw it out; but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the marrows should bind himself to the lap of the woman, then the ointment of tetrafarmacon should be applied to him; so she will eat and recover, and will get well. But, however, if this one comes about, a bad odor will rise from the stomach and head, and it will make the patient blither.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If then are necessary fumigations suitable for this: no one of the ancients has experienced fumeation with nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument that you shall use to smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a dog's head, and one sets the thin end in the smoke, and the large ends above the fire; and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the smoke until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mourning children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but a subtle surgeon heals them: if then it is necessary for the ball to pierce that subtle one at his right hand, and does not pierce it with a spud, and sews up the wound so that it does not touch; then put on another wet cloth in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, so put or prop a cane of pulp, and leave his hands free, and let him rest when he feels pain going up to the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And no time comes this sudden healing of a wound or an abscess; if it is covered quickly: if it is cured, as we have said, with the cane of pulp.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are difficult to treat, and they cause more pain than those that come from the fundament or between the two parts, if there is one or more; and when this nodation is old, if it opens, and again moistens with a clear or subtle liquid, and never does these fistulas persist; and they are caused by him who has an ejection or venting when the patient makes an ejection, and by chance in the spring.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it perforates only up to the bladder, and up to the half of the penis; and it reaches up to the joint of the scrotum, and up to the knot of the cow's tongue.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And then recognize the location of the fistula, and not recognize it at all; and this is that you stick your little finger or foundation with a thin needle made of gold or iron in the fistula when there is no deviation.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is deviation, and you stick a thread of linen or hair of horse as far as your finger feels the thread or hair at your side; and if you don't feel it, and there does not come an outlet of wind or urine or blood, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; but hurry to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula perforates only up to the bladder or up to the conduit of the urine, so that the urine falls, and cannot be treated with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just at the joint of the loins, then let him try to come to his place; if there is no twisting and no pain in the side, then he should not take medicine or apply ointment immediately; and with these persisting fistulas there is no cure except work, and the vain devices of foolish people who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	If it is not persisting and is not old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his loins, and tilts his loins to his belly; then pour a bucket of rain, or a ladle of water if there is twisting, until you know where the piercing comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain around his fundament, then you should put your two index fingers there, and feel immediately that the piercing has been pierced; and know whether it is persisting or not; if it does not work, then do not try to heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignation enjanrant char et soudant.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is done thus, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If that does not work then it cannot be cured; and if the tent is caught between, and does not cut all the way down to the base which is at the bottom of the tent, and there is a covering of char or tar between your two knees, and you see the fistula through the covering on ceu who suffers the pain; then cut off the cover from the entrapment of the fistula, and pour in the fire before the tent, and will be delivered the tent, and it will be destroyed; then burn those faulty skins which seem like a feather of an owl, and there remains none.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, and there is a gap between yourself and the work, then the fire cautery or sharp medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the burning of these joints joined together, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture; then heal the wet tent like a baked pie or a crushed fruit, until the bones come out, and the joints are burnt in the bowie; then heal the wound with dry medicines that do not burn.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is reset, if it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from the very foundation of the chest and is distant from the heart, then it should be cut off or removed from its foundation, and this should be examined.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there are two threads or a thread or a string, or it is ready to pierce, then know that there is only a way of hope and effort in three ways: either you cauterize as we have said, or you cut off up to the foundation, or you stop it with tents as we have first said; and do not go too deep, so you cover the foundation which covers the tent, or by tent or any other instrument pointed; then expose this rotten wood which is in the wound, as far as you can; then examine to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part farther from the foundation: for this is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there is no fistula in this way: and when you plug the tent into the fistula, and it is at the base of the skin on top, so take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put the thread in two, and plug the tent into all the thread in the fistula until it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread of that piercing, so that you plug your two at the fundament; and tie the head of the thread together, and extract one from the other, and leave them for a day or two; and do not restrain either one, until the thread has covered those two teeth that are between them, and they have bitten; then cure the wound as soon as it is healed and well.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, but you make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too perfectly closed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not behoove to do thus for the lancing if done quite perfectly, and then the cure, as we have said, until he is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the needle with thorns from which one makes a fistula is hot and sharp on one side, and not on the other; and for this reason it does not behoove to do thus if done quite perfectly, and then the cure, as we have said, until he is well.
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids are of two manners: either they are within the fundament, as grain of resin, and have some small and some big, and go forward towards the root, and one or more, are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside, if they have a little moisture, and then dry up again, or have a little blood, and have the color of the flesh, the cure for those who have them within the fundament is this: you command the patient to let them flow by straining, until the root comes out, and the thread comes; then hasten and hold it with pliers, or you hold it with your nail, then cut off at the roots; and if they do not stay because of their moisture, take them with a ribbon, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and draw them towards your feet, then cut off, and powder over them some hot powders that are in the fire for cauterizing; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cauterization, since they are cured by other cures until they are well; and if the root cannot come out, take the patient's cure with a blistering, biting and sharp thing to wash what is within the root, so that it can come out freely; when the patient is blistered, and the thread has gone away from the root, the cure is light.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary for you to administer the wound according to this method: take a piece of twisted thread and bottle it in a needle, then bring the thread up from below and make the needle pierce from the other side, then bring the two ends of the thread through the needle, and if it is large; then twist the thread into a knot, then remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, and leave one there to drain the blood; then put a damp bandage wrapped in oil or lard on the foundation, and place it on the foundation, and order the patient to rest; and then leave it alone until it starts to bleed, and when it stops bleeding, treat with ointment and other treatment until it is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	At the bottom or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying out at the bottom or in the intestine, and by necessity of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you resect a wart or your nail the skin from above, which does not let it get wet; then cure it as soon as it becomes hard again as it should; and if it cannot be hardened, then start shaving again harder than before, until it heals and is scraped; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	Do you fart?
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	This text seems to describe a medical treatment for a condition that causes a person to fart excessively, which is referred to as "formice." It suggests that this condition may be caused by a small opening or tear somewhere on the body, from which wind can escape freely and uncontrollably. The text also mentions that those affected can feel a sharp pain with each fart and that it affects the entire body, including the hands more than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a twig of a duck's feather, or a feather of a strong vulture, and put that twig on the fart, until the purple ring circles the fart completely; then bring your hand back to all of the twig until you have covered completely around the fart, and fix it in place, and scrape the fart from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so make this of a dog's or iron's size according to this form, and be subtle and run over it:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	ne mie pierce, por mayz tener ao due, et mayz presier: And if you see, so cauterize the noise, so as it is before or the chapter of cautery of fire.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No time made one bladder of silver or leather, or melted lead or hair; and no time made these instruments little and big, according to the which they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then that one brings in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder small and big is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say that there is a distention where the belly is tied, as you see it, and the chaps are pierced from within; and there is a perforation on one side and another on the other; and let the medicine be placed in a bladder of wine or parchment, and pierce all around the small perforations, and put between each perforation a thread of strong twine wrapped around X or around it; and bind the belly as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if it clings to the instrument before a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oil or ambergris or some other thing be applied to the blade of the cauterizer; then pour it lightly; then the minister spreads the medicine with both hands until it is completely covered; then he removes the cauterizer, and raises the patient's legs against the wall, and pours out the medicine, as much as possible; and if he sleeps all night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you make him a poultice when he has pain in his abdomen, and the medicine comes out soon, then remind him until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or an abscess, then make a poultice as thin as for a child; and this is the form of the thin poultice so that the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said about the division the cure of wounds; or I will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are made of, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by hitting with a stone, and cutting with an épée and a coustel or a lance or a fust or a siette or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that stings on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds, for the reminder will come in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs or the chief bone is not broken, take care lest it be from a rock or similar thing, and the skin is nonetheless torn and the wound is great, and you doubt whether an abscess is hot: if it happens so that a healthy person is sick from the wound, and it is opposite to the affected part; and dismiss the patient's repletion of wine and fatty meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	I say that if he does not improve, if his flesh is wasting away and he does not drink wine, nor eat fat meat; and put over the wound, if an abscess forms thereon, moisten it with oil or vinical spirit; and if there be no abscess, if the wound is fresh and not moved by air, dust, I will say a little later; and if he has moved it, put over some onions, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as of a sword-slash and similar, and the lips cannot be made to come together by stretched out, if they are made to come together by sewing, as I would say to the wounds of the belly, from the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it holds only a little, then bandage it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat heavy meats, as well as cooked grain and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	If you find rot in the leather, and it has not reached the bone, then bandage it well and carefully, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, which must be tied off, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie it off, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light; and that you put this powder into them so that fire will not move them.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of this powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and the powder finely, and apply the wound, and squeeze it to form, until it has healed well and joined together all its blood; and then bind it firmly, and leave it unbinding, if it does not swell; for you do not apply medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make any fire solely with incense when you have dragon' blood but the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has moved the wound at all, even a little, then you should not put any of this powder on it; but put on some softened onions or dough of barley flour made with water and honey until it has healed; and then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the break of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers; and I will tell you later about breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	the wound comes from the throat and is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the throat where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the neck, if there is no other device than to leave the cure, and do not put anything restraining, for it harms the neck and makes it retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its extension of the air is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be sweet, if like warm water in cold water, and mixed with oil, and washed too in warm water, and other small stones according to this way, and wet with oily.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and the bowels full of blood, then the perforation or deeper; and if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, so that it dries up and stops, then cauterize it properly; and if the inflammation in the throat is cut, or the voice, and the treatment is kept, for meat goes well, if the taste is kept on the neck of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape; and then remove it forward, and leave it for some days, then treat it with ointments that are useless until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, then push them hard everywhere it can be, and those you cannot reach, then leave it as long as the wound putrefies, and its issue is obstructed and stiffened; and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound, and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on the treatment of wounds.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If the wound is from a lance or knife and it is deep, then look to the wound to see if the patient feels pain: since thus that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep and is fresh throughout the entire body, do not apply powder at first, nor bind it so as not to cause pain unless it has completely healed, and allow the patient to rest; but if you do not have ointment, put raw cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on his back for three days, or four, or more; then you will no longer see any spasms or painful twitching from the body; and when you see the right signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the boils and other ailments as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot be healed, then cut out what is bad so that there is no fistula; if the cure is done like this.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	For if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is deep, then sew it up; and if it is shallow, then use powder, and if it has broken into pieces of bone, then cut out the wound, and treat the raw parts as described above; and if they are not raw, then let the wound fester, so that the extractions will be easier; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement dou ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	For the rupture of the abdomen is great and little and small; so that there is a great wound which does not let the intestines out, or the ropes of the intestines, so that the intrusion of air; and the suture is more difficult, and never less than a small wound than a great one, for if we leave the intestines in place, coming one after another, it is because they are cold; and for this reason the intestines swell sometimes so that they feel the cold, if we do not put them back into place, and because they are smaller, the little wound feels more than the big one; and know that the rupture of the abdomen has three ways: the common sutures have their source in the abdominal suture, and the common and specific sutures of the other wounds are common to the other wounds; but nevertheless they are more specific to the abdominal wound, and I will say each one separately and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines comes out, and there is something to be done, it should be done with one of these two methods: either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, heat it with the following method: dip a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water, or cook it in squirt and cumin and spices, and draw out the intestines until they are swollen; and never stop doing this, and rest as much as you can so that it swells up.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water or warm it, and cook the herbs, because in this way the entrance is closed to a small amount; and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids; and the first cure should be to rest, that we do not cut it unless there is a great need; and this is the instrument to split it: If you cut inside the loop and don't go out, and see this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are protruded, if you return them to their natural place in their proper position, if you can do so, for it is necessary to do this.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then raise the head and chest higher than the lower part; and thus, the wound that ruptures from the abdomen is in one of the two parts; and so it is necessary to arrange that which I said for large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you will arrange yourself in the same way, and then, between your hands, minister to the wound with sharp knives that cut through all of it, and join the lips; and this is the common way to stitch up, and it is necessary for you to squeeze a double thread around the needle from both sides, according to the size of the wound, and leave a space of one finger's breadth at each end; then take another needle and thread, and sew on in the same way as before, leaving a space of one finger's breadth between each stitch; then tie off the thread, and do not cut it short, but let it hang down so that it will not get in the way; then cut off the ends of the threads so that they are even with each other; this method of stitching is better for small wounds, for if you use too fine a thread, it will not hold well; and it is not good to push the needle too deep into the flesh and skin, lest it pierce the wound before it is sewn up; and then tie off the threads at the end, and do not cut them short, but let them hang down so that they will not get in the way; and if you wish to make a large wound heal quickly, then sew it up with very fine thread; and this method of stitching is better for large wounds than for small ones.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him the intestine, then it was outside for 22 hours, and the wound closed after 15 days, and I treated it, and he healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where they do not have any, and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two ways of stitching: take the needle, and draw it from the outside to the inside; when it has gone through the flesh, turn it around so that the thread comes out again on the other side; and the stitch is made as the tanner does with the fur, and let the thread come out once on one side, and bring it back again on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which the Gauls do properly, if it is so that there is no thread, which brings together the two parts naturally, and applies one of the heads to the other head in this way: make an eye or a hole near one of the heads of the mirror, and pierce it down below, and leave the two heads of the stitch; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part jutting into that inside, as the two heads of the stitch; then pierce both from the outside part jutting into that inside, in two other heads of the mirror that are on either side; and this is the way to sew and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	The Gauls say this word, and no one testifies to the contrary, that we should sew the belly to two needles, or thread in each; and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with a thimble; and know that when the tear is in the middle of the belly, the stitch is more difficult than the others of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Judging the wound is the same as judging other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, let the intestine back, and the bowels; then put on the powder with a dry cloth, and if the fire has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and tie the thread, and bind the poultice, and the mirabene; then cure the wound as others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to heal, a cotton cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need any other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the main members, then you should moisten another light one with oil of tempera (a type of warm oil), or with rose oil, and put it around the arms, and soak the axilla (armpit); and if pain or pus appears in the bulge, and often happens, then let the wound drain (black) wine, and most certainly the pus comes out to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestinal tract called "small intestine" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is because of the development of veins, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to that of a newborn.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the tip of the wound jumps out from the wound, put it back as soon as possible while it is still fresh; and if it has become old and dark, you must find the location of the dark spot, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the two edges, and let the two heads hang down from the side of the wound until far away so that the extraction can take place when the tip jumps out, and the wound bleeds.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, one can restore it in some ways, for I have seen that some are torn or have a stomach stab; and the wound was on the right side of the abdomen, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and excreta and wind came out of it; so I applied treatment according to what I could find, and I did not stop being subtle until it was healed, and I closed up its openings.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et when I saw him join again, I doubted that the disease had not hurt his belly; and there was no evil, but it stayed in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and none of the experimenters said that when he has a little wound in the intestine, he must be tied up somehow: take some rope from big testicles, then close the lips of the wound, and when the rope has opened the mouth, so put it on II lips, so that he can take out his mouth; and then he holds his head, and this is so that he cannot untie, and puts another rope after in that way that before, until the wound is all closed; and let the wound heal.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief of the intestine is inflamed, and no harm comes to the patient, and he can be tied up with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal in some way: take the chief of this thread of intestine that is almost completely removed, then tie it to the chief of this thread of fine twisted linen thread, then wrap the thread around the needle, and when you cut the intestine, and sew it back together; and this method of sewing with a rope is only good according to the path of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the small intestine's folds, there is no remedy or medicine except for subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula, or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Sache that all wound or abscess, when they heal, are called "fistula" universally, and more so when they have been cut and drain.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the virtue of the nutrition root hard and white, where there is no pain, and it is also chewed like a pen of an owl; and never once is it clear drain, and another time thick; never once does it break, and another time it breaks. And I have already spoken in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed, and there is no hope, this is only because of one of the VIII causes: namely, the smallness of the blood or pus; or for its malice; or for what it has hard within, and on the lips, which does not allow birth to take place; or too much drain; or the root is rotted, and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because, that which is a manner of pestilence, the digestion is late by nature, and late it is healed, and escapes by virtue in the region; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is made by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if one part is cut off that comes from the principal limb, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the type of fistula that is in this way are difficult treatment, and there is only to work, and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come from the main limb, and similar things. All such fistulas are difficult to heal, and there is no other solution but work, and ignorance; and if there is a fistula that does not come from a limb at all, but from some other part, then cauterize it with fire, so that if it is straight, then you can feel it easily; and if it is bent, then feel it with a thin tent of lead, because the lead bends to the curvature of it; and if the fistula has broken hands and you cannot feel it well with tents, then cleanse it thoroughly with your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is completely cut off, and ask the sick person about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you really know the location of the fistula, and if it is far from any joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the locations that I have told you, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the false tissue and corrupted bones that are inside; and then heal it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right side, it is necessary that you cauterize it completely, as much as you can, then put wet tents in medicine water, and pour it over the top of the fistula until the medicine corrode the excess that has been retained at the bottom; and then put fragrant oils in sifting water, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this means, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted because of the fistula, then remove it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If you are injured in the main member, as we have said; and if the bones are exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then king as long as the corruption is all bone, then cure of things that hinder car so long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, and rent bow as before, knowing you have not gone far: If you discover it and seek until you are at the bottom, and oste all the corruption, then restore the place; and if he is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too great that you cannot come in; if there is no other device than to let nature take its course; and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with a suitable tool for this, and if there are many bones, if you pull them out, do not leave any behind; and if the moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut off and wet and mend it, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot take them off in an hour, then place something that is corrupting on the wound and let it stay there for as long as the bones are corroded around it, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, then wait until the corruption has completely infected the bone, and then cover the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption and it comes up to the root of the bone; then it is necessary to sew and cover everything up to the point of corruption, and then heal it until it is solid. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg; so take this as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from an unknown cause that penetrated deep into the body, until the matter came out on the leg and caused a large abscess, and he had no known reason to operate; but through his foolishness they operated so much that they corroded a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and it came to such an extent that everyone was afraid, and many times it would discharge moisture from the body; and many times I saw him cured after two years, and there was no skill in the art of surgery, until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines they used to cure him, and what was causing the corruption, which turned the young man's leg red, and his skin took on a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of those clefts, and then searched all the clefts, and found that one came up against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly went there, and dived into one of the clefts until I found a part of the bone, and I found it rotten and damaged, and the decay extended up to the bone inside; I recognized what appeared to me to be the bone, and made sure that there was no further decay beyond it, except for that which I had already seen; then I began to treat the wound with medicines applied over a long period of time, and could not mend it; and then I started again, and found the bone just as before, and found the decay still continuing in the bone, and recognized it, and then took out the bone, and leaned over it to mend the break; but I couldn't reach all the way around one side of the bone, so I treated it with medicines; and it healed and mended firmly, and there was no need to go back and forth over the wound anymore except because of the weakness of the patient, who couldn't stand it, and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car por l'evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l'os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n'ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l'aleir ne a venir.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the trunk, then it should be handled thus: take a thread, and draw it to the head of the bone that is open, and command anyone to stretch it up; and place another thread, thicker than the first, on top of the thread that is stretching upward, and tighten them both together; and they are to hold the stretched-out thread in place until they can no longer see or feel the corruption, and do so again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole horse; then set a brand upon it, and then silk from one part to another of the corruption, and let the silk run into the long length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the jointure, then break the jointure that is corrupted, and silk the bone or she which holds it on the other side; and if the corruption is in the extension of II joints, then there is no other pain but to break; and if the corruption is where the hand or the foot grasps, then this thing is very hard, but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire about this corruption, how it opens; and purify it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not do you harm; and know that the chisel and the silks to cover these bones are many, according to the seat of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and subtility, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary that you prepare yourself for each kind of work, and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the sign of the ways of the diseases; and imagine the instrument which you have need of according to what is convenient for it.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Dou fire: For the fire will burn him, and for the water he will drown; and if you have medicine, then that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it is not beneficial, so cover that member to the place where the corruption comes, so that the sick person escapes from this death or malice, which is greater, of the loss of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, and they seem to be burned by fire, and after that corruption travels from member to member, and takes hold everywhere; if you hurry to cover it, and if it is by the stinging of some poisonous beasts, such as sea scorpions and snakes and similar things, then the corruption is at the head of the two members, so cover them, and do not give them space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corruption does not come further; and if it comes to the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it goes beyond the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue; and in this way do all that the corruption comes or goes: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it comes or goes, then cover all the way down; and if it ascends into the leg, then cover at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other thing but to make the sick person die of weakness; and the way to cover or sew the member so that you tie it above and below, and stretch two ministers one thread down, and another thread up, and remove the cloth that is between the two threads with a wide spikelet, as much as the bone is uncovered; then cover or sew, and put of each part a linen drape, so that the linen does not touch the sound part, and comes to the patient another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood comes out when you work, then cauterize the place well, or put some powder on it to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is finished, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to the man at home in the end: he got a blackness that looked like fire had burned him, and this corrosion came first in order on top of his foot, until it blistered all of his foot; and when the honourable saw the corrosion, so he covered up his foot with it, and he healed; and a long time after the corrosion came back to the second knuckle of his hand, and came to me, and I put things that hurt after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corrosion; and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to, that I had hope of making it come back to life; and I was also afraid that if I cut off his hand, he would die, because the power of the man was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his land, and covered up his hand with a bandage, and healed; and I know only to tell you what you should do if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and lingers so long that it forms a great assembly of bowels; and then rot and pierce, and spring forth the bowels, and delay the eyes, as well as our vassals; and the skin which is above is also thin like the drapes which are loosed, and do not corrode until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone entirely perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you can cut all the skin around it, and most particularly when it is thin like drapes; and does not become infected for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are certain that the skin will turn red and that corruption has not yet set in perfectly, and the skin is thick like a chest of wood, then clothe it with a medicine made from Egyptian herbs: take oil, and tar, and equal parts, and put the medicine into a jar, and heat it on the fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes thicker as well; and then take some of this according to your need, and make an ointment with oil, honey, and water, and apply it to the breast, and strain the medicine off after two hours, and then apply it again while squeezing it out; do this many times until the breast is completely healed, and the poultice has turned black; and you will never use water of ashes when this medicine is present, but you will squeeze ashes from a vine, and pour water on them, and then clothe it, until you know that the breast is well healed; and if the patient cannot bear the pain of the medicine or Egyptian water of ashes, then clothe it with an ointment made from honey and wine, which has properties to heal and wash away sickness, and when you have done this, and are certain that the breast is well healed, then clothe it with a poultice made from char, and it is that you squeeze out a plaster of earth, and make it with oil of roses and wine; or clothe it with various medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the treatment of herbs; and if the opening in the breast is small, and the cauterization cannot enter, then widen it slightly with an iron, and put a tent of the Egyptian herb, or basilicon herb, over it until it has widened; and if the wound is too wide, so that you have to leave such a large space open for the cauterization to enter, and if the opening that gushes pus is above, then put the poultice higher up, or lower down than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in perfect health, if they do not become constipated; and if you cannot cover the hernia as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowels run downward, for when the bowels are in perfect health, they do not become constipated; and if you cannot cover the hernia as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowels run downward: let the bowels run lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowel; and take medicines that strengthen it to be placed over the wound, and are wrapped in linen cloths that cover all of the wound; then cover on top of the forces at the hernia's outlet as wide as the first, because they are oiled with a unguent over another cloth according to its quantity, and put it on the outlet of the wound to lighten the bowel, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days once; and that which is on the outlet of the hernia, remove often to remove the bowel, and know what runs from the bowel, if it is poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has spread in a certain way and you see the nature that jumps over the outlet of the wound, then know that the breasts are already moving, and come closer to healing; and then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, if you change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts grow up unwieldy after many days, knowing that her breasts do not grow larger.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons last a long time, then you shall not despair of health, for health draws near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some whose late healing of wounds and those that heal in the opposite way; and if breasts grow up unwieldy after many days, knowing that they do not grow larger; and if they grow late and become stretched out, so that they lag behind, then take care with certain drugs that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as when vinegar is finally made; for there is a great deal of vitriol, and that is the latter drug; take care of it, and make it with oil and rose water, and add equal parts of wine; then use it; and this one does better cooked, because when the vinegar is not present, you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind them together, and make powder out of it, and put it on honey as I have said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and has not been cured with this cure, then know that corruption has set in, and causes pain in the bone, or in hard limbs, or joints; and if one cures a fistula with the cure of fistulas, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toenail of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	is an abscess that may arise in the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps elsewhere; and when it has broken open, and no care is taken, then it comes to an abscess with heat and pain reaching down to the nail root, and perhaps even corroding all of it; and the corrosion reaches as far as the bone, causing a painful putridity, and the two nails spread wide apart, and their color turns pale.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must chop off all the excess that has been reserved for the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail has started to turn black, and begins to ache, and bleeds slightly, then you must cut off the nail, making sure to leave behind the root of the nail, and then cut off the tip of the nail very carefully and lightly, and place burning and corrosive remedies on it in order to destroy anything; and then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corrosion est dans l'os, si le coup, et tiens ferme, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir; et si tu vois le dos corrompu, si le coup est comme il est dit devant, alors guéris-le aussi longtemps qu'il soit guéri; et s'il est blessé, et durci, et sent une grande douleur, il convient que tu le guérisses en premier; puis coupe l'ongle du spatule pris dans une scie transversale dessus, et veille à ce que la scie ne vienne pas au-delà de l'ongle, car le malade ressentrait trop de douleur; et s'il arrive, alors met quelque chose qui apaise.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	La douleur du sourdoyer de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Les deux doigt qui naissent dans les mains de certains hommes peuvent être entièrement charnus, et par aventure ils ont des os, et aucune fois n'ont d'ongle, et aucun ne nait à la racine de la jointure, ou la naissance est dans certains d'entre eux.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Whoever is born with two legs and does not move them, and whoever is born with a joint between the two legs, may move them; the size of the one who is fat is light in some way: cut it at its root with a wide chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Whoever is born at the root of a joint needs great care: if you hold them tight.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born with a joint that needs to be cut, first cut the skin around it all the way down to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, or are joined together by a wound, or are burned by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cut the joint so that it heals according to its natural form, then place between two pieces of cloth or sheets soaked in oil and rosin so that they do not heal; or place between two thin pieces of something, until the joints are healed, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When one of its two hands comes together with the palm, grasp it firmly as necessary.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	These are large, thick envelops filled with melancholy excess, which come from the body's lower parts and affect the legs of those who walk, work, or carry burdens, more than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must not administer any emetic for worms, and then cleanse the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron is done in two ways: one is to grasp it, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The chopping is done according to this manner: rise up the first leg of hot water very strong, until the thick blood becomes thin, then draw out the leg of the sick from above the knee down to the ankle; then cut the vein open in one place, or two, or three, with a wide blade, and then draw out and strain the black blood into your hand, from one side to the other, as long as the blood comes out as if the sick person can bear it; and then wrap it up, and instruct them that they should dye their meat with black ink; and then begin the evacuation and treatment when the veins are clear, and cool down the sick person.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is twisted and contorted and wrapped together, and it is not straightened, as we have said, then it is necessary that you break it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the form of iron whereon one covers the vis if it is curved, and does not split it, so that he covers the vein; and it is very curvy, because if it were thin, he would cover the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in legs, warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in ground where there is no moisture; and perhaps it grows in other places than in the legs, and this causes the skin to rot from within, as if it were crawling and twisting between the skin and the leather.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of this infection are that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then it changes its shape, and begins to burst forth, just as the root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the leg is open, then you should wrap a piece of cloth around it from one and a half to two inches deep, and cover it, and leave the cloth in place on the leg, and every time there is a point where it comes loose, so that the cloth wraps around again; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it over its root, until all of it has come out; for if you cover it, it will enter into the char, and causes an abscess and decay where it is, so that such a thing deserves to be treated little by little up to the head, and there should remain nothing of it; and this chapter should not be treated when the leg is more than five or six inches deep, for then it is too difficult; but if you treat it as described above, it will come out whole.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never use this technique on the leg, and least of all when it is opened in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and it comes out with a loud noise, and from which rain falls; then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our country "buff disease" because it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that births between leather and cart, going up and down all over the body, causing a feeling of burning as it moves from one member to another, until it comes out at the skin, and disappears; and it is infected with pus caused by certain humors, just as worms, snakes, lightning bugs, and pinworms enter the body; and there is suspicion of its malice, because when it enters the body and goes up to the head, and comes to the oil, sometimes it returns, destroying the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you treat and extract it, if it cannot be done all at once, then first place it in a strong and very tight bandage, then cut into it and draw it out; let it fall perfectly into the chest, and if it comes to the surface, cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest damage it does is that it corroding oil, as we have said; and if you see its head coming near the oil, then strap it firmly from the side, then cut into it and extract it; and you must use the patient's hygiene of washing the cors of medicines to solve the bad humors putrid, and sear with meat that is decaying.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vacirir", and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; and immediately after, I felt it rise as high as a worm in her shoulder, sooner than anything else, just as if it were silver alive when it moved from one place to another; the pain left that place, and entered into her shoulder, and then, a little after, corrupted all her body, until it came to her other arm; then she told me that she turned herself about the body, as I had seen her do.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how this woman was moving her limbs like that, from one limb to another, for I have never seen such a thing in this disease.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Anyway, I have often heard that people with this kind of pain move from one place to another, but I have never seen it like this in this woman; and I thought that perhaps her body was too tight, and the veins uncovered, and because of that windiness, constricted; and I do not see it according to this reason for those who are deluous, and who have moist bodies and veins that are relaxed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see that this disease is cured, and the patient feels this pain, if he opens like we said before, let him rest and then copious amount of water comes out; and cauterize that place; and if you do not see it in your hairs, make him take medicine to stop these pains, like pilules of putrid wine, and of serapin, and similar.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are different, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they hit.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are some with large tips, and others with small ones, and some with hair, and some welded; and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and some hit in any member so they hit according to two ways: or in a principal member it hits, as the brain, heart, liver, pancreas, rein, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she falls down in any of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, is revealed: it is necessary that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after many arrangements; and when this bad sign is not revealed to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, if you pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull, is when there is a scald and a twitching and a redness in them, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of sense, and vomiting of food; and perhaps it does not come out from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and when the wound seems moist and white like pus, and also as if burnt by fire; and if this sign is revealed to you, then you should treat it, and pull out the arrow if it is stuck.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the sneeze when it comes, is that it is near the left breast, and also because it feels like it is stuck to something hard, not empty; and perhaps the sneeze also moves like a bird, with short black breath, and coldness and sweat, and fainting: so one can doubt that death will come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the sneeze that doesn't bring water is that there is no foam that jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's skin changes color, and he breathes heavily and shivers with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the sneeze comes in the covers of the neck, then it rips the small ribs; and it gives a great noise and pain and sighing; and all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the sneeze comes from the stomach, perhaps it doesn't bring any meat out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow pierces through the belly, and does not go through the intestine but stops there, then there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces into the bladder, and the urine flows out and escapes, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is the face and neck and throat and shoulder and aid and spine and strength and hip and legs, and the limb that looks like it, are safe according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it does not cause pain, as I will tell you what happened to me, do not make it any other way.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow went into the neck or larynx at its base: I tried to pull it out, and I drew it out on the other side by pulling on the ear fat, and I was healed without feeling anything.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And throw a arrow that hits in the fat of the oil of the paper, and the arrow was re-set, and I could not reach but the tip toward the wind, and the arrow was great with an arc turquoise, to all J felt light without ears; the game was sane, and did not come any bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And throw an arrow at a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic to ears: I knew the barbels, and subtilized as long as I threw it, and the Christians were sane.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And throw an arrow at a Christian, and the arrow was great to a chest or a belly, and I thought he died; and then it passed XXX days, so his disposition did not change; I cut on the arrow, and engaged it, and threw it, and had no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you want a man with an arrow in his back and the wound is closed over it; hold the arrow inside and do not interrupt its natural course, nor will you find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was closed over it; and he held it so that he did not suffer much pain; and many others also.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated an arrow for a prince's king, which had gone into his neck and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was all closed up. I was called in after it had been stuck there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I asked him to wait for a full moon and he didn't feel it; but he felt pain and itching on the right side of his ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of the arrow. I put plaster on its tip, because otherwise the blood would swell up; and I saw the arrow's head.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on quickly, and soon resolved the wound, and delayed it for a long time, so that the patient felt the arrow in his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the wound medicine that burns quickly, so that it was opened, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which was getting tighter at its place; then I increased in the opening of the wound with that medicine that burns, until the shape of the head of the arrow became visible; and three months later, and then the wound grew larger than before, so I pushed with tweezers from both sides, and could not pull it out; so I continued to be subtle and to devise ways of tools, until I got one with sharp points, following this shape, which I pushed into the wound, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Do you want me to say the quality of extraction for certain arrows, so that you apply your cure in this case that I did not mention, because the book cannot include everything; but the skilled doctors compare only a very little thing, and what is present and failing, try nine operations and nine instruments for the removal of foreign bodies that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are in the limbs or they are stuck except for two ways: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which is stuck by the way where it enters, it is an arrow stuck in the flesh, and none of them ever remains inside.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, leave it until the hair is rotten inside, and clear the exit; and also if it has been driven into the bone, and cannot come out, leave it for some days, and make it move a little every day; and then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, pierce it all around inside so that the hair inside becomes larger, and then take it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow has been driven into the bone of the neck, and goes to one of the ears at the base of the skull, and any of the accidents that I have said can happen to the patient: do not extract it, but leave it until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes out suddenly, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if an arrow has not been driven into the bone but only has touched it, and does not go deeper than the skin, and the patient remains for some days without any bad accidents, then use the tool to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is dislocated so much that it cannot come out, then administer tarres in the entrails, as I told you; and then cure the joint until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is in place in the center of the chest so that it cannot be seen, look for it with all your strength; and if you feel it, apply a suitable instrument; and if you cannot draw it out because of the wound, and because of the profundity of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then break it open as much as the wound is large; and if you can draw the arrow out, and if it has ears to hold it in place, twist or bend those ears until you can draw it out; and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it once, so that the hair is left in place by the roots, then cut it off, because extraction causes pain.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the removal of blood causes you pain, then apply what we have said about the cure in his chapter; and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and do not move it gently at first or later or firmly or loudly; and put the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow came out, for this is the greatest help, and if you cannot, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another place, or which does not hurt anything, or whose cure is swollen in a certain way, whether we can see it or feel it: cut off now, as long as the tweezers can take hold of it, and then remove it: do not wait.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters into the bone and widens the hole in the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, continue holding it, and then start the extraction again as long as it comes out; and if there is any arrow in it, squeeze it all out with your hand; and if there is a lump, you should administer the poultice, so that when it is administered to the lump, if the poultice is applied at the tip of the lump, then push it out completely, and if the arrow has been stuck in, push the instrument into the tip of the arrow with care; and then push it out completely, and if the arrow has been stuck in, push the instrument into the tip of the arrow carefully, so that the extraction is easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has hit something, then it is necessary that you cut all around where the wound is, if you can, then treat the wound as you think right.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces you in the chest or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the skin, then cover it with a cloth if it is covered; and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound if need be; and cure it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tweezers used to treat arrows are similar to the beak of an owl, and thus should be used as follows:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many ways to extract an arrow: large, medium, and small, depending on the thickness of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the point of the tweezers is also like the beak of a bird, to grab the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tweezers for grabbing and extracting are as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins of the neck:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	XXXI veins from which health is drawn, of which there is a head of XVI, that is to say: II batans which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the II arteries which are in II temples apparent; and II veins which are in II eyelids of II hairs, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the child; and the II gizzards which are at the neck; and the II veins which are behind the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augeherich"; and the II veins which are behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which health is commonly drawn are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it lies next to the left coast, and it is called by the lay people "vein of the head"; and its companion is called "fast" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and it is called by the lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic lies next to the right coast, and it is called by the lay people "vein of the belly", and it is on the surface of the bone, and this is that from which health is drawn, which opens clearly above the pulse.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet du senestre costei, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville du destre costei; et li voine qui est apelee "nesse", que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And the small joint is the one between the index and the ring finger, and if there are two; and in the leg and where the foot is there are three: one is dislocated from the coracoid of the left side, and the second that is at the ankle on the right side; and the joint called "nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three joints dislocated from those. The small joints that are after the ears help with the old catarrh and headaches; and the quality of the small joint, as I told you, is that you rub the base where the small joint is with a rough cloth; then strain the patient by a screw, until the two small joints appear behind the ears, depending on the head: feel them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse move aside, so you know which one it is; then take the lance, and cut through the small joint up to the bone, then lift your hand from all the small joint upward, and tear and the skin and the small joint well two on the other side, and make the blood come out until you see it; then strain and tie, until it has healed. And I have said before about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parlait et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The patient's pain in the front of the neck is as great as his pain at the base of the skull from the old disease of the face, and from migraine and lightheadedness; and his quality is such that he twists his throat until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and tighten with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow as much as you see fit; then cut off the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is healed and never works again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not good that the flame be too hot; and he severs the vein across, for the bone is close by, and the flame might break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The severing of the two veins that are in the two limbs should be done with care, and with regard to the tickle, and the lightheadedness, and the oriole in oil, and the diseases of the face; and the quality of their severing is such that the patient's throat should be twisted by any ligature, as before; then the severing, and let it be done across, a little bit of a long flame a little bit wide, for there is no need for a char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is a little fire, by chance it will break; then let blood run, as much as you need, and then tie on cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the blood from the vein runs a little, and suddenly becomes thick, and diseases of the face come on, as migraine and fever that comes into the face, and especially when it is old; and the quality of the blood so is that the patient strangles his throat, then strain his vein with your left hand, and take the subtle little flame long, and put it between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well on its own, and now let it run; and do not stop too much completely, and let blood according to your need, and then bind it for a night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the text: 
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the health of the teeth and lips above it helps to collect in the mouth, and to the corruption of the gums and splits of the lips, and for the birth and growth.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit before you, and straining his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them because they are black, and because they are small veins: so take one and also do the same to the two veins that are above and below, for this is a similar way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	For the health of the tongue after the health of the head, and it is to the contraction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the doctor is that the patient chokes between your hands before the sun, and the tongue, and look upwards in each a black vein: so heal one and the other, and do not go too completely, because there are veins.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly treated are done so in two ways: either by striking them with a sharp, wide blade, or by using a subtle olive-sized blade; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is wide and thin, as it is named: and is wide as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat, thick veins that contain large, visible blood and tumult; and this is the shape of the olive-sized blade.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is thinner at the tip, and is used to treat subtle veins where there is subtle blood; and this is the shape of the blade used for treating subtle veins with yellow-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment for the basilica, which is one of these veins, is used to treat ailments in the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the doctor to cut thoroughly and to stop the blood flow from the artery that is connected to it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he hits the earth, and the pain of blood comes, if it is necessary to tighten, as I said; and it should not be grabbed by the flame, but cut off like a sheep.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the base does not open clearly, if it is necessary to remove it and change another; or you want any rain from it, or you cure in its place the vein with the arm: it opens clearly; and hit by fire, cut off like a sheep, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the place of the wound, it is necessary to remove the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then mark the place of the joint, and then bring back the arm, and open the vein with fire, cut off like a sheep; and be careful not to hurt in the artery when you see the place bleeding, for it is from the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si tu vois jaillir en haut comme l'urine d'un enfant, et que le sang est rouge et fin, sache que c'est du sang artériel : hâte-toi donc, et mets ton pouce sur une longue durée, puis enlève-le rapidement lorsque le sang cesse de couler, car cela arrive souvent ; laisse ainsi, et ne bouge pas le patient ; reste dans la peur, et ne bouge pas tant qu'il est en bonne santé.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood doesn't stop flowing, and it comes to you, and the medicine isn't given, if the artery is opened, because the head of the shoulder is retracted; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a slice of fig, and wrap it around the injured area, and tie one half to the other for a full day; if the blood doesn' t stop, then use the powder that stops blood, as we have described, in multiple dosages depending on the size of the wound, and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The surgeon of the vein takes half from the root of the head, and from the corslet, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and the surgeon who sews up must warm himself for the nerve that is in the corslet, and if he sews too much, he hurts the nerve, and it swells and the wound becomes infected, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you heal it with the aniseled instrument; and stay away from the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, let him make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The surgeon of the cephalic must cauterize it with fire, and hold the hairs; and it is necessary to cut in the olive flame or the marten flame, for this is the most saved of all veins, because it has neither a nerve nor an artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	But it is necessary to seek the lightest way, and do not trouble yourself if it fails the first time, and start again; and by chance, the legs of some men, when it fails the first time, but it does not trouble you.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about the physician is that medicine should be practiced only for the sake of maintaining health and preventing diseases from arising; and it should be done in one of the three locations: head, chest, and abdomen; and one should practice medicine at the beginning of fasting, in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and one should practice medicine on the first day or third day after two hours or three days a week.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine that is practiced with respect to diseases has no determined period of time, but it must be done at any hour or moment; and one should not practice medicine on children until they are twelve years old, nor on women except for a quarter of a month after giving birth.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old men of sixty years should not be given medicine.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	Old men over sixty years of age should not be given medicine. And if anyone is to be treated, in whatever way, one must avoid upsetting the intestines with a light enema if there has been a blockage, so that the intestines do not pull out the harmful waste that damages the main organs; nor should one treat those who are too bloated from meat, or who are constipated, or take too much medicine, and who have diarrhea, or abdomen cramps, or multiple sexual partners, or excessive drinking, or fatigue, or anything else that upsets the body's balance. Then, if one is to be treated, first make a sublimate substance, thin it out with water, and treat with this substance; then bath or shower in warm water, unless it harms you, because it subtilely relieves pain; and treat the vein from above the navel as we have said; and protect yourself on the day of work, and from hunger, and lust, and similar things; and be sober and considerate, and let those who are to be treated stand higher than those who are treating them, and rub their arms twice or three times, then draw the vein out gently, because when it is too tight or weak, it cannot be pulled out; and then rub the treated area with the palm of your hand, until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the doctor's hand with a little oil, and place his thumb of his left hand on that vein where he is to treat, so that the vein does not hurt or cause injury.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if he opens it for the first time, it is good; and if not, then begin again a little on that part where it is to be opened or on the hospital, if his legs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if his legs are swollen and the patient hopes for it, let him rest a day or two, and do not bind his arm: perhaps he will come out with an abscess; do not enter or bathe, but begin again the treatment if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the cut is shallow, and you doubt whether it has broken as much blood as you see, then work on the wound itself rightly, and start a little hospital so that his legs may not swell; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the leg swelling, do not begin again with the treatment, but put a little oil on it, because it cools the body's heat, and is soft in this part of the leg where the oil is; and thus administer the oil to each wound that you are treating for the blood flow to stop; and he himself makes a sound and bleeds when he is put on the leg; and if it is too large, cut it subtively until it is no longer so large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	Et s'il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n'est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l'estraint une houre; et covient que tu faiches ceu aprés l'issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s'il demoure au leu après certains jors aucune noirceur ou verdure, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vois, met sus aucune chose de aloez ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times the abscess and appearance occur at the treatment of the bazaar: so put your hand on it, and if you feel the soft place with the pressure of your hand, that is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nous avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l'artere; mais li fai Iemplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d'autre cure, tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat every wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it drain until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it stay until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for those who are weak and have need of blood extraction, let them make a larger wound and let the flames be wide; and for those who are feeble, do the opposite, and let them save themselves often and well, and let them heal by cutting across, not by stabbing; and this way of healing is better than long healing, because it does not involve blood loss or nerve damage, and it heals faster.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to those whose heart is in the throat, one should give moist bread soaked in grape juice; if it burns, if it gives three or four times; and if he has a cold constitution, if he wets before the throat with moist bread soaked in musk syrup, or in honey syrup with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chestnuts, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he chokes at the throat, after a little while of drinking water, if it is necessary that he hams with beer and fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up something in his arms, and sometimes chokes again, it is necessary that when he weakens through great choking, he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to vent the arms after the first wound, and he has a strong heart, so heal him seven hours after the first wound, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who is wounded elsewhere, should be healed the next day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has blood flowing within the body which brings fever; if so, draw out great quantity and widen the wound as much as possible; then that you treat all conditions of wounds, and place your hand upon his pulse when he heals, that death does not come from the arrow's point, and this happens many times, as the wounded is neglected; and it is not good to dislocate the arm again, and cause blood to flow for a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly; nor if it is curved, let him extend his arm widely, for that would be wrong; but let it be until he heals for the second time; or you put a point of fire upon it, as much as the frozen blood flowing from the vein allows, and place some thread dipped in water upon it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein escapes him, let him leave it and do not tighten it, as long as the abscess is calm.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires the extraction of blood a second time, then in the middle of the vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that emerges in the arm is connected to the vein at the base of the head because it is composed of the same substance.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of the wound is such that the patient dips his hand in hot water until it turns red; then remove it gently so that the vein appears clearly, then cut it now, not wide nor long; and make the incision close to the joint of the hand, and do not cut it deeply because there is less risk of bleeding than if you cut it while it is still standing; and this method of cutting this vein is more secure than any other method of cutting veins, since it does not involve cutting an artery or a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for the right hand's savate, is good for all liver ailments, and this is how: remove the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein is gone, if you can see it; then stretch it out, and chop it with everything, if it doesn't hurt anything; and don't cut too much either, because the nerves are all exposed to the air, and then put the hand back in the hot water, if it's frozen in the wound, and can't be taken out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the pain as much as necessary, if there is oil and thread, so that it is firmly held together, and do the same for each joint.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for the left hand' savate is good for mouse sickness, and do the same as I told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The soldier of the pharynx is equal to all diseases that are foreign to the body, such as diseases of the mouth, retention of flowers, disease of the kidneys, and ancient diseases of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of this soldier is that the patient drinks some hot water and rubs the vein until it stops, and lays it on the joint of the foot; and the vein goes to the ankle, and above the foot go many rains; heal therefore or larger rain, or at the ankle, that it moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the joints that are foreign to it, and heal it with a hammer as well; and let the fire go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get out of it, put the foot in water and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it is necessary to cauterize for the first time, start again for a second time after a small amount of time has passed because the leeches are salty; do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and make the same effort with the other leg evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leeches of the sciatic vein are at the ankle and their cauterization is good for the pain of the thigh when it comes to bloodletting.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this bloodletting is that the patient goes in or bath, and removes it from the ankle with four twists, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then you draw it out in all ways that you can, and cross it; and it is better to chop it than to let it go, because the leeches are fresh, and it has been reabsorbed by many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not treat it, so that no rain of the one who opens or closes his foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves; and make the blood run until you see it, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	wounds of suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Ventosas are made of horns, or of horn, or of glass; and the ventilation is done according to two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventilation which is without piercing so is according to XIIII parts of the body, so that one is all in the head; and the other is half in the neck; and the others are in two sides of the neck; and the ventouse under the chin; and the ventouse on the two shoulders; and the ventouses on the two arms; and the ventouses on the two legs; and the ventouses on the two ankles; and this ventilation does not treat blood unless there are small veins that are scattered in the chest, and for this reason it does not always fail, if as one does a wound of a vein; and it is not suitable that it is either all fire or without fire, in any illness that comes from overalimentation, until the whole body is cleared.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Et s'il doit être vaporisé, soit par nécessité à cause des maladies, soit par habitude, nous devons le faire tous les mois, au début ou à la fin, et pendant chaque temps; car il y a ceux qui, quand ils doivent être vaporisés, ont une tête lourde ; et ceux qui font de la rougeur sur leur visage, leur tête et leur cou, et du noir dans les yeux ; et ceux qui font couler le sang par une goutte dans leur bouche et qui perdent la langue et qui souffrent de la faim ; et s'il y a ceux qui rêvent et voient peu ou pas de nourriture, de boisson, de mort ou de choses similaires.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to be vaporized after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The patient's voice is in aid of the grief of the head ... that comes to the hairs, and it does not come but that there should be an evacuation of all the body; and this windification is in the place of the voice of the cephalic, and it does not come but that those who are of cold complexions should use it or who have chatrer, for this does them a great deal of harm; and because of this it does not come but that the old should use it in using, or those who have chief cold illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are healed with it often become confused, and for this the suction cup should be placed a little lower down because of the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The windification comes out of the neck in place of the voice of the head and the basilica, and for this it is good for the stretching of the penis, and the cutting of the canal of the penis, and all, and repletion; and it should be pushed a little bit because if it holds too tightly, it confuses or the stomach and where.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind-pangs at the chest as at the neck cause pain in the head, and giddiness, and spasm, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and are in the place of the health of the bazaar; and it is necessary that you instruct the doctor that he should press his hand upon the part to be affected, that he should not crush the artery, and that he should not allow any spasm of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind-pangs at the mouth cause sickness of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and are in the place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind-pangs at the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind-pangs at the elbows cause as much pain as three veins in the arms, for they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the doctor that he should not stretch them too much, for their skin is thin and there are many arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventose that is on the back so fits with the emoroydes of the foundation, and with the diseases desoz, and it comes that the ventose be big, and be of air, that it has a job of good milking; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg ventouses so open, because they draw blood from all the body, and are good for old pains of the joints, and of the foot, and of the bladder, and take away the flowers; and they are in place of the two sophenes, and the two cheville, but they weaken the body after long use, and bring death to many constitutions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way of putting the ventouse is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and place it carefully, and move equally, and do not cease to do this as long as you see the red and inflamed place, and then turn off, and remove the ventouses, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, because there are some who have great pain, and clear pores: so it is necessary to wound once only, and to make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is heavy without, then strike twice: the first time to thin the blood that is heavy.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick without, then strike a third time; and when we want to squeeze out blood little by little, then we must press firmly only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to extract blood, then let us begin often; and if the outside is thick, then make a perfect incision, and the end should be that the wound pierces abruptly, and covers him who has thick and tough skin, and who has suffered much pain, that you soak the leashes with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, with nettle oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is very hot and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of balm, or of aniseed, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if they have a dry and hot constitution, and are large and thin, then you should not use oil, but rather wash them after immersion in rose water, or cold water, or water from mulberries, or water from cucumbers, or water from porcelain, or something like that.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if they have much moisture, then rise up with it, or with water from mistletoe, and sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And if they have a thick and moist constitution, then rise with old wine, or water from oak, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not suitable to bath them before the sauncing, or to bath them, but after an hour or two; and do not let them sleep after sauncing, and let them be heated when they should be heated, and when they are heated let them saunce.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are healing are colerics, and the sun is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that he press cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in vinegar, and similar things; and drink little, and char of cheese, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, if they press honey syrup and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and drink little, and eat fruit and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that it will be windy, he must drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men three times or musk before wind, or after, to strengthen the limbs; and soften the sun, but it only suits those who are hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The wound that is not yet healed is placed under the liver, and under the abdomen, podagra, and under the belly and loins and rains and hunch; because this member does not like to be hurt under the olives, and it is done only so as to attract the blood from one member to another, as we put on the breasts when the child is not yet healed; to remove the viscous substance that is in the member, as we put the wound on the belly and on the loins to reduce the member; and it alleviates the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if it relieves by its attractive virtue perhaps the operation, or removes the stone from its place; and so does it when it is placed under the liver and under the abdomen when there is wind retained, and these wound are emptied only to suck so much as it is needed; and they are never emptied together fire, and never plain water, unless in the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way that we fill the wound with hot water, or with water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup, when placed on fire, is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup, when placed on fire, is as follows: It should be two inches wide and half a palm in circumference, and it should have a small hole at its center, about the size of an awl, so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the body; and in the middle there should be a crossbar of iron or brass, to allow a grip to be placed on it. They are great and small according to the disease and age of those who use them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And it should be placed on the limb like this: take the wax grip or the thread and put it in the middle of the suction cup over the crossbar mentioned above, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and your two fingers should be on the hole we have mentioned, so that when you press, if there is vapour, and then remove the suction cup; and take the thread again as above, and repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the chest-piece that is amined in pleurisy disease, with all water, does not have a verge or a piercing, and is only amined when it is plain of water, and is placed on the member so little; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	In the chest-piece that is amined in pleurisy disease, with all water, does not have a verge or a piercing, and is only amined when it is plain of water, and is placed on the member so little; and this is the form: In chest pieces that are amined in pleurisy disease, with all water, do not have a verge or a piercing, and are only amined when they are plain of water, and are placed on the member so little; and this is the form:
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Se ceu non, si leve le leu d'aisil, et puis d'aigue, mout bien, et puis l'espreint; et si li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille i drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchis; et si li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu'il soit estenchis; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu'elles s'aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et si tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If not, then lift up the shoulder from below, and then from water, very well, and then press it; and if the shoulder is too far forward beyond the neck, then dip a linen napkin in cold water, and put it on, until the shoulders are numb; and if the shoulders are many, then put crushed vitriolic acid [or lead], or galena, and similar things, on them, until they are numb; or put half of peeled beans on top, and leave them there until they heat up to the shoulder, which will now stop hurting; and if you need more, take other shoulders.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the translation of the provided text:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapter of fire is sometimes necessary in the art of medicine, and is a cure for breaking and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the wise men pour forth this fire chapter, which is not to be found in any of the ancient books or letters, and for this reason the science has been lost in our country, for I have never found any good one; and I know nothing about it except by the study of the ancient books, with which I have much studied, and by experience, and by the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter of fire what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore let us say in this book the sum of the words and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delay on truth, so that those who are tested may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d'une part et d'autre, s'aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n'est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c'est a savoir froides joutes, et char d'oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne mejuce nules grasses chars, et ne s'emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sang, tant que tu n'aies doute d'aposteme chaut, ne d'espandement de matiere au membre; si revient li malaides a som premerain governement qu'il a useit.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods of great fattenness, where there is viscosity, such as cooked bread in water, and rice, and eggs, and pork, and butter, and fish, and fresh meat, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with great fattenness the healing is retarded and begins more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bone of the old and the decrepit cannot well recover or hold together by its own nature from the loss of the members, nor those which are too soft, as the bones of small children; but let it be joined again with large joints that pierce and bind the member together, as much as it can; and do not at all spare its work, and for this it is necessary to feed on large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or of the foot, and in this chapter I will tell you about all manner of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the knee, and another when it is twisted, as when the blade of a pen is turned to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture that makes a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each type of fracture has its own tool for repair, according to what comes to mind in its place; and is known the fracture of the bone because its line is twisted, and is open quite a bit by the pressure of the hand; and when there is no torus or bend, and the patient does not feel great pain unless there is a fracture; but it may well have torus, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you don't feel like moving it with your hand, but instead put medicine on it that comes later, and then gently constrict it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that goes in arvol, and are the II parts separated, now they must be put together evenly, so that the abscesses become smooth and hard; and if the abscesses become hard, if you leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are calmed down; then he puts it even to the bone that you can do it lightly and cleanly, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of the one where there are pieces; then constrict it, as it will be explained later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if the extension of the two parts is hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or at two strings, or at a string and at your hand; and place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are extended, if you pull with all your strength the additions in their places on the bone that you can, and keep that by your work there is no injury or pain for the sick; and shape well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if it is heated properly, and do not strain too much, and press not as those who make it come by their overwork abscess hot and contracted member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, instruct the patient that he does not move it, neither awake nor asleep, turning or otherwise; and guard well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, but is in place, and the disposition is such that he does not feel any pain; and guard well that it is put correctly, so that no torosity comes when he is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are different in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car il y a petits membres, si com bras et doigt et semblant: si convenait envelopper drapeaux de lin mollet et subtil; et ceux qui sont gros, si com cuisse et jambe: si convenait envelopper d’un lien large et dur, car les liens larges embrassent tout le grand membre, et l’engencent de toutes parts uniformément, si qu’il n’y a point de tache; puis li entoure de légers coups, III tours ou IIII selon le membre, et tire ta main un peu à tout le lien, puis va au-dessus de la rupture et l’engence moins, que la rupture puis s’éloigne un peu la rupture; et adouci le lien un petit peu tant que tu pince une grande partie du lieu sain, puis reprends un autre lien, et retourne dessus du lieu brisé; puis reviens à la partie désos de la rupture, et l’engence légèrement, ne mie trop fort ni trop doucement, si com nous avons dit en la première lieure dessus; puis met entre les liens enveloppés de lin ou de drapeaux, tant qu’il soit toz uniforme, puis li tout par dessus l’emboîtement, et puis met tes étapes bien faites s’il n’y a point d’abscesses ou d’enflure.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, put something soothing onto the abscess, and let it rest for some days; then draw out the core, and make a hole with a saw or an axe head or palm branches, and be according to this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And the beam that one puts on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and also far away from the limb as much as it is necessary; then draw out the core with the same saw as you did in the first hole, and tie it up, as you did in the first hole; the closer it is, the better; and the thread should be thin, not too thick nor too thin, and made of linen; because if the thread is thick, like the ropes that foolish people make their beams from twisted linen, this is a great mistake, because the beam cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it only deserves to be between each beam half an inch of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pregnant by the chaps of the stars after extraction in their health, then remove those clothespins with linen, or another rag, so that he does not scar.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breach, and the bandage is torn, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not come to extract from stars all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it does not come to put on stars before 5 or 7 days or more depending on the depth of the abscess by sometimes; and here is the way of ancient plasters for restoring breach, dislocation, and torsion: and this you take flour that stands on the walls of the mill, and confound it with much ash, and put this confession, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring the breach to various dispositions, most importantly to women and small children, for it is not too thin or too hard.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster to restore fracture, dislocation and torsion: take honey and locust beans and enul and asafetida and arabic gum and mugwort, in X z; myrrh and aloe, in V z; alchemi, in VIII z.; and make a powder, and mix it with sheep's dung; the combination of the human body is warm, so use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster that is useful for torsion: take mugwort and sheep's fat, in X z; myrrh and aloe, in VIIII z.; acacia, in VI z.; armeniaca (senna) powder, in X z., and finely grind it, and mix it with water or sheep's dung, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones that have come out of their place, to soothe the pain gradually, and to make the size of the wound smaller: take new milk and mix it with water and oil, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Emplasters do not help, but they are good for soothing an abscess, and properly relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make an embellishment that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-pine leaves, grind them together, and make an embrocation.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an embellishment for healing broken bones and soothing the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marshmallows, chamomile flowers, violets, wheat flour, and each a part; grind them together, and confound them with wine, and heat the members, or confound them with water or liquorice moistened with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make an embellishment that is more effective than the first one, in case of persistent abscess before healing the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of marshmallows, and seed of flax, dock, melilote, and sweet grass, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each an equal part; grind them together, and confound them with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its need for rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iocrene declares in his book that one should not put a broken limb in any wrappings except those made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that they should neither be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put dry things that are slightly warm on a broken limb, in order to restore it, such as myrrh and olive oil, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plasters which are good for lesions and pain: take wool from sheep, or feathers of birds, or lard, and string it together evenly, and grind it up, and make a plaster out of it, and put it on the leg.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then take it a little apart, and make sure that the patient feels no pain, nor has any movement in his bone; if pain comes to the spot again or an inflammation occurs, hurry and take off the plaster now; take a light cloth, and a sea sponge wet with water, and dip it in the water, and raise it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved; then leave it to rest for an hour, and then put on another dry cloth, soaked in warm oil or butter, and tie it on, a little at a time, until you are sure that the patient is healed; and continue this with a small amount of plaster, and do not take it off as strongly as before; and do this very gently, so that he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscesses, redness, pain, and swelling have come from everywhere, and you need to use plasters and binding, if it begins again, as you did at first even.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the member at all that we have said, unless it is after three days or four or five or seven; and never more than twenty days, according to what you see, until the break comes, and the support of the shoulder approaches; then restrain it more than before, and let it grow flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the moisture dries up more than necessary, then wash it with hot water every time you release it, and let it be for each third day, and let it dry a little; by this work therefore cut off the moisture to the member, and carefully mend what is wrong, that restore the member in a tortuous way: it is bad, and if it is very painful, and I do not see anything but to let it rest and then make it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various ways to break a bone
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are various ways of breaking a bone and they have different shapes, and the causes are distinct; because there is a break that is made by a spear's impact, and all the bone is shattered up to its shaft, as if it were an arrowhead or a lance; and for this reason this way of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	For the spear pierces the bone from above, and is called this way of breaking "absolue"; and is the wound from such great or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a break due to impact, or a crack, or a blow on stone, or falling onto stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break that approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that is made in the bone is as fine as a hair, and is a small fracture, and for this reason it is called 'capillaire'; and if the wound that is made by hitting a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and makes a piece of bone come out; and the head of the bone is so wedged in as a blacksmith does when he forges on the fire; then let it be inserted between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if there is more moisture at the top of the bone, as at the head of a child; and there are all these types of fractures that small pieces are broken off, like these; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the types of fractures by the traction on them, and the investigation of the tent, and by the corrumped cart that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by what happens when bone is exposed, and you rub it with salt, thus opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, be cautious of accidents due to disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of reason, expansion, paleness, feverishness, and hair growing fur and turning red, and other similar signs in multiple conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you don't see a promising accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the baby is born first to you, and it's in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it' s in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day at most, so that the tissue around the bone does not rot, and the accident that we mentioned occurs.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes only to the membrane that covers the brain, so it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and it is that you press the head of the patient severely, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more smoothly than you can, and because the evacuation of blood comes to uncover the bone, or abscesses come, help him with what is necessary, and is that you fill the place of the membrane with wet linen oil-soaked; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calmed, and be sure of the evacuation of blood; then begin to remove the bone, and this is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you cut the strictest part in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then there are other similarly large ones.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that if you have a number of different shapes, some are short and others are long, and are pointed, and are of iron; and in doing it lightly, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce it from behind, so that you bring the nails with the points, not completely through so that they do not pierce beyond the bone at the tip, and must be above the point with a margin or circle, so that it does not let the point go beyond the bone; and you need to have more than one, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have nails for all of them; and this is the form of the three ways of nailing:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing behind the bone is that you place the nail on the bone, and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put the nail in another place a little further on, and do the same throughout, then make the incisions narrow as possible so that you cannot feel them, and lightly, as we have said, until you can take the bone out by hand, or any of the tools you have, such as pliers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the skull or the sinews.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have cut the bone and treated it, if you recognize that you should preserve the sharpness of the bone from all other tools that resemble an incisors, but it is necessary that it be more tender and thinner than the other incisors; and if it does not retain any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly attached to the instruments; then cure the wound with clean and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way to cauterize is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and it must be done very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture has opened; and when you have discovered this part, you shall place at the end of this lens-shaped incisors:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and this part is wet in both sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then pound with a small mallet from above, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be well aware of the hammer that is desos; if it is ajar to the bone, then the bone lightly, for one would not harm the bone, and fear would not come.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce until the skin, and the bone is cut so little by above, and there are small pieces, then let you cover those roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor of which you must have various quantities, to adjust in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are using very large razors, then use smaller ones, and continue doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, you must adjust it according to its alignment; and this is something that is not well answered to the one who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the syringe is uncovered, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth double, soaked in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the syringe, then strip it off, and administer medicines thereon if necessary, as roots of lilacs, flour of timothy, powder of frankincense, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it immediately medicines of the world without bitter taste; and take care that the wound is clean, so that you do not leave the infection, nor do you let bowels assemble together over the linen thread of the skullcap, for if they corrode and break through, they bring great evil to the patient, because when you put something mordant on the syringe, it may burn from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take good care, so that no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blackness comes only because of the medicine that has been put on it, which has its virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and III parts of oil and II drapels of glue onto it, and wrap it in the syrup; then cure it in the way that seems right to you until it is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts of the neck above are never broken, or one by itself, for they are bones; and this bone is cartilage and does not break unless it is bent or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should drill a small hole in the neck, and put it equal to that break inside your little finger, and at the thumb by its side, until the neck regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if it is broken in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to its place, you must realize that you put the neck even with a stick a little big.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if it is broken in two parts, then do the other way, and you hurry to restore the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth, when the abscesses are calm, then bind the neck with linen bandages, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another of the other part, if it is broken; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the apertures of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that there must be no restoration without wetting the bandages and changing them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that the bandages be wet with sheep dung and powder of mullein; then leave the bandage on until the bones are hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never bottle up or nest pens of geese in the tent, and if there is a draft of air, let it stand, and blows the sick among them, or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes while you are working, so that you put cotton wet with oil or a piece of patch in it, or a little bit of hydromel.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not come, so that you put a paste from flour and si-sement, and powdered incense, cooked with honey, then put it on light bandages, and do not bind the penis; and if the break in the penis is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then cut the breach, and cure things that get in the way, and suddenly, if you put pastes and ointments suitable for him; and if there is no pain inside the penis, then cure the tent, and put cloth of linen, until he is well.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not shattered into pieces except that it may be bent inside, then you can handle it gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side of the jaw, you should stick your index finger into the mouth of the patient from the left hand; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, stick your index finger from the right hand inside, gently pushing it back in place, and make it equal with the other hand from outside, and tie it.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is in II, you should bring together the two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the inside, or rupture, then stretch it with a gold, silver, or silk thread; then put a cloth over the broken jaw, and put another cloth on top of that; and put a big, well-made plate over the cloth, or a piece of leather that is even, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it down tightly, and order the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Et si tu vois que la figure se change, si le désactive au tier jour, et puis remet à point ce qui a été changé ; et met empêtre sur, de la poudre du moulin avec abond d'œuf ou farine de siseament, après ce que tu as osé le cerotage; et met sus l'empêtre autre plus légère, et si les empêtres s'aert, et la disposition du malade ne se change pas, laisse-le tant qu'il soit sané ; plusieurs fois est sané en III semainnes.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses appear, so introduce what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, remove not a piece of the bone; if subtile of the osteotomy are the instruments appropriate to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, so widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have taken all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is deep, make it wide, and put on them compresses that are suitable for this, to draw blood, until they are well.
de la forcele	force him
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	And he forces him several times in front, above the shoulder, and this breakage is according to three ways: or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a breakage with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the ovraige is so that if the breakage is without injury, you have two ministers, so that one of them turns the shoulder so that it does not break; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the breakage equal on both sides, so that its form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair loss.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	Et s'il a besoin de plus d'étendue, si mets des os un speire rond de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc sa nécessité; et estont et lieve la forcele, et estrongent le speire à ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il convient.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot remove the head of the shoulder at the end, because it comes out completely, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his side, and let the shoulder rest on the ear, and push down the minister's shoulder below, until the bone of the shoulder comes up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on your two sides, and if you find it difficult to join them, it is necessary that you cut them; and remove the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, put this tool back in the shoulder, to keep the medicine away.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and seems like a spoon, and is not a nail, and be also as wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and has II chisels, as you see, and one is wide and the other is narrow, as is the breaking of the wound that you made when you broke the bone; and when you are confident about the warmth, if the wound is warm, and the break is small, or you doubt about the warmth, then wrap the wound with cloth and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if warm flesh comes, dip it in oil, in ash, and in wine, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if warm flesh comes, dip it in oil, in ash, and in wine, and put on it. For the extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no fracture, do this: put powder from the mill and ashes of egg on the bone, and apply light splints, and wrap a thin strap around it; then take a thick bandage about an inch wide and long, and wrap the splint with it, so that the head of the splint is hanging down; and wrap a thin strip around the break, and hold it in place; and loop a thicker strap over the back, and tie it tightly; and make the patient walk on his heels, and let him move his arm forward, and keep it from moving by holding it with your hand; and let him walk thus for XX days; then start again with the plaster if you think it necessary, and hold it in place, and let it be restored; and it is restored in 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	For the dislocation of the shoulder, it shall be that the shoulder does not return to its place and only moves by touch; if the appearance of the fracture is in accordance with its form, and you restore it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can do so; then put on the shoulder powder from the mill with a lot of flour, and light strokes, and put on a double cloth; then put on a wide and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, and untie the board at the point where it is tied; if employ this cloth to bind the board of flour, so that the board cuts evenly; and then tighten it firmly with a strong bandage so that the board does not move from its place, and look at the bandage every day; and whenever it amolishes, if tighten it again, and put the board even if it has moved out of place, and lay the patient on his back; and the shoulder is set in XX days or xxv, And when this number is completed, if untie it, and be sure, for this is not bone that moves so lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and there is no pain, if it is raised up, and the bone, and do what we have said in breaking the forceps to calm an abscess, hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The piece is never broken in the middle, but this happens; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it inclines to pain, and there is a lack of relief, and again, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and you place a pillow between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of the II ribs with your hands, and carefully put it in an even position in all ways as it should be; then put it on plasters and cover it with thin lead, or other lighter material, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around the back, and tighten it up, and loosen it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if it is necessary to remove it, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and remove it, and peel off the plaster, and treat it with cures; then put back the plaster, and tighten it up until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rupture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I saith that the break in the ribs comes only from within, near the back and at the top, and they do not bend too much unless they are thin; and the sound is well heard by the two ears.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you should restore it so that the break is even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then put on plaster, and fasten with a stick, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break in the ribs is slanted inward, then the patient feels great pain and a sharp pain, as if he were crying out, because the bone does not support its own weight; and it makes him faint, and he vomits much blood, and this is a sign of serious illness, and they have put up with great discomfort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of these who serve should administer meat that swells the belly, to push the break away from the inside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, except for heated abscesses; if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let the skin be warm.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we should not place vacuums on the site, for suction formation, and this seems reasonable to me; however, there is doubt that the vacuum will attract excesses to the site due to weakness in the disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should not cover the site with another moist thing in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the shape equal again, then it is cured with the cure of ulcers, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain from the point of the broken rib, there is doubt for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to split the bone at its end, and to take a tool to protect the wound; and then one should cut the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses break out, put oil on the bandages to keep them dry and place them in their proper position; and while treating the affected area, make sure that the bandage stays in place until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from a fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes when there is a fracture of the neck bone and there is no pain; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to someone and you do not know if he will recover or not, if you see his hands soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in several situations, and if he does not feel pain and does not feel it when it is pulled and does not feel it, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the patient has been cured, if one puts a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if there is a similar sign that comes out at the back of the neck, you must know whether it is healthy or not, if it is, pay attention to whether the bones are soft and whether the accident that has happened to them is due to their own will, and on the back the wind and excretion move without wanting to; and when you have thought about it on his belly, if there is excretion without wanting to.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he has thought about it on his back and he tries to lie down, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	I tell you that this is fatal: do not try to work at all in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come from him, then he is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is this: if there is an abscess that is hot, put oil of rose or meif oil on the spine until it is soothed; then put it on a compress, dry it, and tie it up, and order the patient to rest; and he should not sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Et si certains os se dessèvelent, couvrez-les avec de la graisse ; et scellez l'os, puis assemblez les deux lèvres de la blessure, s'il s'agit d'une grande blessure, avec une couture, puis appliquez le traitement à l'huile en utilisant du char, jusqu'à ce qu'elle guérir ; et si l'os est brisé, c'est ce qu'on appelle « la fracture de la côte », si vous prenez un pot avec votre main gauche et le placez à égalité avec l'autre main à votre portée, puis appliquez l'emblancherie et l'étaiement au-dessus, s'il y a besoin ; puis maintenez-le en place, et si certains os se sont dessèvelés, couvrez-les et soignez la blessure jusqu'à ce qu'elle guérir.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For a sprain of the hip, if it is severe, cover it with fat; and then seal the bone, and then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is a large wound, with a stitch, and then apply the oil treatment using char, until it heals  ; and if the bone is broken, this is what is called "a fracture of the hip", if you take a pot with your left hand and place it level with the other hand at your reach, then apply the blainer and support above, if needed; then hold it in place, and if some bones have come loose, cover them, and heal the wound until it is well.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hipbone is broken, and if it is, there should be only a little bit of pain in the head; and make it long, and lower down to the side, and bring great pain to the patient at that place, and also swelling, and an enlargement where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting-to-rights: let your hand be upon it as long as you are upon the broken one; and know what is the break and how it looks; and if the break is at the head, then make it even as much as possible, so that it may look like its natural state.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or if it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his back as much as possible, so that the setting-to-rights of that break may be made known to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then put the plaster upon it, and then put a plank or a beam upon it, and draw out the break so that it does not move; and take hold of the place where the bones join together, as long as they are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his back or side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses burst, and there is no pain, as long as the abscesses are empty, and place what we have said before; and then return to healing, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is what is between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then you should restore it according to one of the two ways: one is that you take a strong rope, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lie down on two chairs and tie them together, and cut the patient on one side; then put him on a strong rope, until he comes to rest in a position, and have a strong rope ready; then tie the broken end of the arm to it, so that the patient does not move; and then tie the ends of the arms together, so that they are equal in length.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should hold the patient on his back, and tie his hands to his neck, then order two ministers that one should tow who is on the breech with his hands, and the others tow the whole body, and extend each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more difficult, then tie the body with tow, and under it, and extend each minister to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the breech is close to the shoulder blade, then it is necessary that you put the tow under the assel, and on the other side at the feet, under the breech; and also if the breech is toward the feet, then it is necessary to put the light tow, without labor, as long as the breech is even on its place, and on its feet; then make it even, if it is necessary, and hold it, because it will not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	Et si l'apothicheme est chaud, si ne l'estrangent mie jusques à VII jours, et mets sur lainne mouille en aysil et en oile roset, tant que l'apothicheme soit apaisé; puis l'estrangent, et la manière de l'estranger si est que tu mettes l'empôstre sur la briseure, puis assemble le bras sur l'ajutoire, et met ta main sur l'épaule ou sur lou sein; et mets le drapel, et strange sur l'ajutoire, et sur lou bras, si que le bras soit en lu d'estelles, s'aucune chose ne le défondent, ou se li os n'est muez.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stakes, and put a wider and stronger stake than the others on top of the fracture, and leave two spaces between each stake, and let each stake be as large as to pass III times the width of the fracture; then strangle with the stakes, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the cast on the fracture, stronger and more away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the sitting of the stars, and the extraction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and doubt the abscess warm, let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then watch each of the three days to see if itch does not swell or come to its place, or if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too much strained.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you have a sore throat, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if such an accident does not come, let us free it only after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, with his hands on his stomach; then fasten the shoulder with one cloth of equal size, and every hour, at daybreak and nightfall, check whether the figure of the broken member does not move or become softer; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him meat as we have said before, in a way that the meat is on the first layer; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is fitting that the shoulder and leg should be reset within 40 days of the injury, and then they should be unbound and given baths and medicinal ointments to promote healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stiffening is ugly and swollen, it should not be unbound until 30 days or 6 months have passed.
de la brisure du bras	from the breakage of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one small and one large, with the small being at the top and the large below; or perhaps both may break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the healing is light and quick; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the little bone that has been broken, if it is convenient to stretch it a little bit, and put it on an even plane.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If it is the little bone that has been broken, if it is convenient to stretch it a little bit, and put it on an even plane. If it is the big bone, then stretch it harder; and extend it across the chest, and adjust the splint of the arm higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself in this position, and the splint before him at a height that the patient does not suffer any pain; then extend the assistants' arms to the injured limb, or to the lieni [a type of splint], and other assistants at the other end above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then let him put on an even splint, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking there are pieces, then let each one be put in its place, and if any of them stick together so that they cannot hold them apart, then bend the bone and set it with force, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the caustic to wound, I have spoken to the single chapter; so take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there come abscesses, then I bind them with a plaster made of oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I bind it lightly from above, so that the abscesses are calmed down.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then take the wax off, and I lay on the plaster of the powder from the mill with a lot of egg, then put the splints, and let the splint of the break be higher by more than one, and a little wider than the others; and know that there should be six splints or arms in several positions: whether the break is in one bone or in two; and draw up more strongly on the break than on any other part, and always less when moving away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter about the plaster; and may the strips that are on the break be soft and wet, and not too hard nor too rough, and may the thread from which it is drawn be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And support the limb and the ligature for a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, as when itching comes to the limb, it is right that you dunk the limb in hot water until the itch is relieved; and let the limb rest without constricting it.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then start the extraction again, and if the ligature is softened and the bone exposed, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it is too constricted so that the member cannot come into being, then make it soft a little, and leave it for some days, until the constriction comes out, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not dislocate it until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Keep him lying on his back with his hands by his sides and make sure his neck is straight and still, and let him sleep. Know that this break-healer will be restored in 30 days or in 35, perhaps in 20, depending on the combinations and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and at our two sides there are few breaks, and there comes but a little pain sometimes.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or painful, it is fitting that the patient should cross his hands, and he should stand upright and evenly in front of him; then let him put his hand on an extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, and make them even, as well as they can be; and put the plaster and the staples, if there is any blistering, then a piece of cloth is wrapped around it according to the quantity of space; and it is wrapped in a linen bandage.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks within the parmenter under the plant's belly, then make a rope of drapels, and command the patient that he strangles it to its broken plant; and then extract it with a long rope, and make its Steele as great as the plant of his hand, and extract it, as it comes.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the back, then it is necessary that you put a Steele on top of it, and another one under the plant', so that his hands are open and straight, then you tie it all around the hand, and stop up the vein between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks at one of the two sides, then let him make it even, as it comes; and pull it with the plant, and if you see that you can put a small straight Steele to raise the break, so that it does not move; and if the break is at the other two sides, then let him make it even, and tie it to the healthy side which is after; or you tie them all together holding, so that he moves, or you put a Steele on top of it, as if he pokes; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme warm, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the chest
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the chest are often bruised, and one can clearly see when they move forward and backward; and the healing process is good if one ties a bandage over the bruises, and another around them.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies down on his face, then extends each minister to his part equally; and it is when the fracture has entered the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the chest, then one of the bands goes over the hand, and the others go around the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then one of the bands goes over the knee, and the others go around the fracture; and so, if he extends it downward, then put the bone in its natural position with his two hands, until it is in its original shape, and then put the plaster on it, and tie it up, because there comes blood from an incision.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calm then return to your work and your treatment; the time is done in a certain way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calm then return to your work and your treatment; the time is done in a certain way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if it slips and falls on the ground, and turns over what has happened, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold, then do whatever is possible; and if not, then split the place where it is, and pull out with force; and cure him as we have said, until he is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never break the chest here because we put it there, as in the shoulder or arm; however, when restoring it this way does not cause the patient any harm.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the chest is restored in one day, or little more or less, according to the various complexities of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the lane from the knuckle
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the lane from the knuckle there is little rupture, but it often bleeds.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is just a split or gash, and goes to all the wounds, and feels no pain, then it feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing is such that one puts an equal piece on both sides until it is assembled so that one can move it; then apply the ointment and put a round bandage on it if you need one, and stretch it as necessary, and also for all other breaks, as an abscess hot and others similar; put on each accident what corresponds to it until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg break
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	We know that in the leg there are two bones, one which is called by right "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all similar breaks come as those of the arm, and for this reason the healing is done equally; and if the two bones break together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his nose is broken, then turn back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it well; and turn aside.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then arrange the extension, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that his fracture be ugly, and he has many pieces, so that the extension be less and lighter; and align according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, then take two faxes of wood that purple the leg on one side and on the other, and are long from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in two blankets above and below, and tie this bundle in the middle, and it shall not descend the leg to the right or to the left, and so is good; and no one should administer two faxes of wood, and if it is made of wood, and one puts the leg to hold it from moving, and properly he does so on the fracture or wound; and moves each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; then heal as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the feet
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but from the bones of the feet comes a fracture in some cases and not in others; it only occurs when broken in many cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the feet, and you see these bones overlapping each other, so that the patient lays his foot on the ground like he wants to walk, then now put your foot on its side, where the bones are raised, then press them together as they go back into their places; then apply the plaster and press it down, and place a small tablet flat at the roots of the feet two fingers wide, then tie it tightly around the foot from above, and then remove the wrappings and any other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the joint has healed, for you will find that the bones are even, whether they are broken or not dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Et s’il i a aucuns des deux brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit aux deux de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember that you must not forget the other things that I have said about the other breakers, as we have said; and help each accident in turn as it arises.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of breaking the bone of the wrist with a hammer
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of nature is broken in two by a hammer, if the woman is placed in a sitting position with her back supported and her legs outstretched, then fill the breach of nature with cotton that has been made large, and put as much as there is; then let the woman stand up and pull on the back little by little, and then remove the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature and joins the bone again with pulling; and when she wants to urinate, if she removes the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and so do for seven days: so the break will be healed, and death will cease. Take a bladder of goat's milk and tie a cord around it, then pour all of the milk into nature; then blow into the cord forming shapes until the milk is gone inside: nature will then return the break, then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the jawbone of the man or woman is broken, let it be put back as we have said with regard to the hip bone; and these injuries are not hidden from him who puts it to his study and use, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means many things about the right way of restoration: hear then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vagina, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and pour the vaginal fluid into it; then wrap it in linen, and let it be for three days or so, and he will be cured without surgery.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is right for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is great, such as the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be healed now, so that the healed ones that we have spoken of bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but there is still vitamin water, then you should start repairing the break in the same hour, or that day, if the abscesses are not coming out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses come out, but do not continue to heal until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm, and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, because you will bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is protruding from the chest, it is necessary that you put it back into place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal to your hands in terms of length, then take this tool made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and whose width corresponds to the amount of the wound; and for each break, it should be sharp at one end and slightly thick at the other: so that it does not compress the member with your work, and is sharp in front and thick towards the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for the shoulder of the curve should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and he should be pulled once, until he recovers, and be even one with the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot take hold of the bone well, you must chop off the head of the bone so that the instrument can have the power to do it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot restore the bone as we have said, with a suitable instrument, be it an incisor or a file, to your power; then strike off that which is delayed in the bone with roughness and small scours.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is restored, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its natural position, then moisten the dressing with black vinager and let it stick properly to it; and do not put anything on the wound except oil where it is necessary, lest it come into corruption and decay; then administer medicines when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, wrapping the covering all around it, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not tightened with the fracture; and often do this, for they have done such things to the sick man, or dead or decaying, and so the instrument is softer and more pliable than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or great, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it does not suit you to put on splints; but wrap it up tightly with hard cloths, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after a day or two wound to the bone, take off what you have put on entirely, and bind with a healing poultice, as with a four-part poultice and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and restored.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be separated in such a way that the bone does not hurt.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it hurts, and he cannot bind it but it comes together again, knowing that there are little pieces of bone which cause pain, you must pull the wound open, and remove all these troublesome pieces which bring about pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is a fistula or some other kind of corruption that needs to be treated, according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if the bone is broken and opened up on the limb, as in the hip or shoulder bone, and other large limbs, do not draw it out, for many times death comes, but leave it to putrefy; maybe after XX or XXX days, then heal the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	And the bruises that come from the sour wine
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Come often after the santity of the break, especially when it is near a joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the limb's figure; and perhaps cannot make the limbs move naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care, therefore, if we are fresh: if you administer stinky medicines, as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar things; so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine of the stink, or with abun of honey, or with oil; and put them on the knot in piles, and bind them well, and do not remove them for several days; and then loosen them, and start a new one, until the knot is hard; or you hold it on a piece of leather well made; because the property of the leather is that it will make all swelling on the limbs go away; and if the knot is already hardened, it is necessary to cut it off, so that the excess appears, or you cut it with a razor, until it is hard, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the stay
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	And the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains after weak and thin members for various reasons: because one is too tied up tightly, and was not tied up as it should have been; or because he had too many ties, and could not bring the healing to the member; or due to many irritations; or due to too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood increases within him; and administer baths, and give him pleasure and rest; then put poultices on the member so that the poultices attract a lot of healing, and irrigate it often with warm water, until the healing goes to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the wounded limb after surgery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not harm its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that the member should be broken anew, for many foolish people have done this in our land; but such practices are blamed, and they bring great pain and even death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, let them be immersed in hot water or soft herbs are boiled, as with leaves of duckweed, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the ointment is made morbifical, as with well-made astringent, and you take musk from duckweed, and confound it with linseed oil or sesamum oil, and make an ointment; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of colza, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is the bone moved by constant and prolonged rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Let there be movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the limb is twisted and hardened, as in stone, it must be opened with iron, covering up to the bone, cutting lightly with a sharp knife; and put on ointment and care in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if he should now bring it back to its place by gentle movement alone.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, and the joints swell up, and by chance does he bring it back to its place by gentle movement when it is swollen: many times this brings about swelling and other pains; nevertheless, when this has happened, you should make the patient well, then leave him, as long as the abscesses are calm; then raise the member with warm water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each member as the cure comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the ointments for dislocations of the shoulder joint down to the heel.
des mandibules	the mandible
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Now let's go over some dislocations of the jaw, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are a little out of place and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the breast, and causing the saliva to flow from the mouth so that he cannot keep it in or close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return it with many different positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it in the hospital, and do not tarry at all; and in this way that the minister takes the chief of the illness with his hand on the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands are far away, to make it even; and command the patient that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the wound remain equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And let them be brought back gently, together or separately, if they have been dislocated by cold water and oil, as we have said. Do not hesitate to bring them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they have been brought back equally, and the mouth of the sick person is closed smoothly with a softener, if you put it on drapings wet with oil and wax made of oil and wax, then let it lie gently between them; and let the sick person sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move or strain at all, but relaxes his muscles, as long as the pains are gone and the jaws are healed; and then eat lightly, and do not struggle to open the mouth for food or drink, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour and do not return to their places, then fever and usual heat come, and by chance stomach discharge, and by chance vomit of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times it kills him who has it, in nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not come out from inside the body along its extension from the throat and from the mouth, and is dislocated at any time to the side, and we feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies down on his back, and stretches his arms; and then press upon it with your palm, and it will come back; and then put the plaster and bandage on it, and bind it; and if there were no head of shoulder, and if it dislocates at any time, then you bring it back to its place as we have said; then put the plaster and bandage on it, and bind it, and command the patient to rest as long as he is not well; and in this way is the head of the shoulder also brought back.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance came to some men a pounding or break, and swollen the shoulder of an abscess hot, and thought that it was dislocated by him.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It therefore seems that you test it, as far as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And is known the dislocations when it goes down towards the shoulder, and makes a difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between them a great difference; and you will find in the head of the shoulder an abscess, and remove the shoulder to the table the head of the shoulder, as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its side, or move at all; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, then it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly on the table; and this kind of dislocation is not worth repairing, when it is new, or when the patient has hurt himself.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers hold the hand of the sick person on high, then put your poultices over the shoulder, and force the joint up to its place; and the ministers hold the hand, and stretch it up, and then they put it away; so come to hospital quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in the hands of a day later, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and allow the administrating of softening and soothing infusions, such as an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and mieliette in water, and to be allowed to rest; then let the patient lie on his back, and put a sheet of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, behind the shoulder; and place the minister's hand on the patient's shoulder, and pull down the hand of the sick person; and have another minister rub the patient's chief, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder comes back immediately, and they see if they do so according to this way: and it is that you make present a man who is more powerful than the sick; and let him stand on his right side, and pour out this shoulder behind the shoulder of the sick person, and raise the shoulder up, so that the sick hangs down by his arm; and have other ministers pull down the hand of the sick person towards his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if you also do it in another way: and is there put a long branch in the earth, whose head is also like a pistol, and not too big or too small; then cover the patient with it, but let it have a drape above it, and the patient lies on the long wood of the branch; then extend his hand towards the other part forming, and the joint will return to its place peacefully; and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a branch of II arms of great and IIII fingers wide, which has the head reont for perfectly enter em in asselle according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie on the head of the branch covered with a drape, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, then put it in the asselle of the patient; and extend your arms over the long branch, and place the shoulder on the branch, and the arm at the head of the hand, and then put the arm over an inch of a stone of great width, and extend the hand towards the other part, and leave the body hanging from one side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is put in place, in any way that is convenient, it is necessary that you put a ball of wool equal, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and olive oil, on all the shoulder and neck, then remove the joint forward, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at the collar, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck a little while, until the members are comfortable, for he will heal more quickly; and then suck again after five or seven days, and move them; and if they are firm and not softened, they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or some other cause, it is necessary that you apply the caustic to three parts, as it is put before or as it is plastered with the caustic.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it sloughs off after seven days, and the joint does not hold fast, and cannot raise his arms up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are either torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint was never properly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations near the neck, and behind, are caused by impact, stretching of the hands, and should be treated in another way; and I will instruct you how to do this until they are well.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes greasiness to the limb, and tardily moves, then the patient should often bathe, until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation at the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint at the shoulder is dislocated in one direction only, and returns to its place in that same direction; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, then the dislocation is not properly set, for you can see and feel it clearly; and dislocate it according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the bad shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder anywhere.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it in such a way that the head of the humerus comes into place, for if the head of the humerus comes into place, it may be reset with great pain; and perhaps it cannot be reset from all sides, especially at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and perhaps leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And if it is possible to do so, when you can, extend his hand with your two hands; and spread his arms wide, and his hands towards the shoulder on the outside, and then bring the joint back to its bone root, or at its base, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is dislocation in front, then return when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fix the root of the palm that has fallen out.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, then give it strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and dye it two ministers, so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide; and when you see the joint at the joint to its hand, then oil it with any oil to soften the joint, then tighten the joint correctly, as long as it recovers; and when it is in place, then put it on dry plaster with lamb's blood, and strain it correctly, and wrap the arm around the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, and then undo it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is fixed in its place, and it slides away, and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not fixed well, then begin to plaster and bind it again, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly set in place; then let it slide.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the reduction of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved; or put on the joint a wet sheep's wool, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter or bathe; and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the wool back on, and then go in or bathe again; and do this twice or three times, until he is well; and if you see, put on fine sheep's wool heated with butter, and strain it over; then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand should be reset, and it is lighter than other joints However, you must return it to its place as soon as it is dislocated, so that the joint swells or there is an abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you reset it, place the bad hand on a table, and extend the fingers, so that the palm faces the joint's edge, and put it back in this position until it heals. However, you must make sure that it is properly aligned; then, place the patient's elbow on a table to extend and reset the arm.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the patient' arm on a table, and let the person hold their hand up to the joint' face.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, this is good; but if it does not, then draw out the pus that causes abscesses and leave it in this state without encouraging it to return.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in its place after some days, then the joint is twisted; do not touch it except to cut off any nerve or artery with a delicate cautery; otherwise, you may only extract it by fire, and perhaps there is no other remedy except to cut it off.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put the poultice on it that we have described, then draw it out and leave it for 5 days, then remove it and leave it.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, then moisten it with hot water and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not dislocated on either side, nor at the back of the palm or the stomach; so they are, and remove the dislocation to the joints as long as it comes back, then hold the knuckle of the finger with the thumb, and move it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it there for a day, and then make it equal that day; and from that time on, if it has been dislocated at the base of the hand, and do so often, until it is healthy again; and also do this, when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the shoulder at the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, or several of them are dislocated, there will be no cure for it, for it kills the patient quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens wholesomete, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se mute au derrier si est apelee "gilbositez": li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d'enfance: si n'i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those who come from falling or percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with great words have brought him no great benefit; but I have shortened them according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the giddiness which comes to the back, there is no remedy or cure; and likewise that which comes straight to the II sides, and cannot be cured except by the one who comes to the back, as I say; it is because the patient should lie on his face in an even position, and have a strapping on him so he does not get hurt; then put a fire stick in the ground formed, and another at the feet, and tie a rope between the two stobs, forming a line between the fire and the sick person, and another at the knees, and ankles; and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the II sticks; and let them be well tightened, the stick as we have said, and the rope puts his palms on the spine formed, until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Et s'elle ne revient par ceste cure, si prenne une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l'espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sur l'autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu'il revient au leu; et si tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if it does not come back with this remedy, then take a tub of three arms long, and chop the side of it, and let the patient lie on his side, and bottle the head of the tub against the side, then put the middle of the tub over the spine; and place the minister's fingers on the other head of the tub, and press firmly until he comes back to his place; and if you see that the fingers slip, then do it with a thumb that returns to the hand.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, put on dried plasters with lots of resin, and then the stitches, and then the stele of a tablet of three inches long, that purple it the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, and the thread of a rope, as we have said, and use the patient subtilely nourishing food until he is well; and if nothing comes at the end of health, then administer softening medicines and soothing with the stele that we have said before; and never once does a piece of lead come on, and never does appearance come in the posterior spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, for one should not have presumption: perhaps death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	Here is the translation:
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the hip and shoulder joints come only from dislocations, not like the other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, before and behind, and more inside, and less before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy, it is longer, and more than the healthy genitals, and cannot double the diseased knee at fire; and this is the place that is inflamed and swollen from an abscess, so that the head of the thigh comes in.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of who it comes before, is that this accident is opposite to these in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of who comes before are that their leg is well in accordance with the complement; however, it does not double the knee in pain, and when they want to make them walk, they cannot walk forward, and they hold their urine back, and their ankle swells, and when they go, they go on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the hip is softened, and the hip bone is out of place at the sides of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And those who have this type of dislocation should be treated if the dislocation is old and does not improve with time, otherwise there will be no cure; and it is better that they do not expect too much.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset the joint, and tighten it from the inside and outside, and turn it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary that you work very hard with one minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the ground with a strap around the knee; and let another minister stretch his hand over the joint on both sides, so that he presses his hands together, and then pulls the strap tightly around the hip; and let another minister tie the end of the strap high up and low down at the same time, until the patient is standing straight on the ground for a while, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is so common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then it is necessary to put the cure on his back at ease, then place the bandage on the root of the thigh, and the one that is out of the hip, then make the bandage go up towards the hip, and towards the force; then press other ministers on their arms, and embrace the large bandage of the diseased thigh, and stretch it to the outside form: now it will come back to its place; and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot do it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the sick together with a strong rope from one foot to the other, and be more extended than the others; then hang them by the neck on the top of a post, and have two long arms; then order a minister who embraces the head of the thigh, and have other ministers hanging with the sick, who embrace it well, because the joint returns now very easily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	Et when the dislocations are on the side, let the patient lie down, as we have said in that which has gibbosity, and extrude II chains properly upon the sick leg, and also upon the foot; then put II torches, one to the head and one other at the feet, then place I torch between the legs of the patient towards the form; and plant thereof moisten fabrics about, lest he hurt the sick man, then extend each minister toward him, and let him put the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, set him upon a table, and press him thus as we have said in gibbosity, and let the patient lie on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are before, if it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and let him place his pain to be upon the sick ankle, then press with the other hand, and let him extend forward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et si la dislocation est au loin, il ne convient pas de tirer le patient vers l'avant, de le lever sur la terre, mais qu'il soit plutôt placé comme s'il était assis avec les jambes étendues, comme nous l'avons dit plus haut pour le couchage sur les deux hanches; et qu'on le place sur sa face, et que la ligne étendue soit pressée sur la jointure de la table; et elle sera bien lorsque le patient étendra ses jambes, qui seront longues; alors retirez les cuisses, mettez l'ampoule, et l'extraction d'un bandage, de sorte que la hanche ne bouge pas; et qu'il repose trois ou quatre jours, puis que vous le retiriez, et mettez l'ampoule sur; et si vous voyez qu'elles sont longues, tirez-les alors, comme nous l'avons dit, et laissez-les reposer pendant trois jours; puis retirez-les, et faites-le grogner bruyamment, jusqu'à ce que les membres soient confortés.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the hip joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	It is dislocated according to three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if he does not flex at his knee, knowing that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put his back on his face, and put his foot on your legs; then take his knee between your hands, and pull apart between your two hands, then bend the II ribs at the knee joint in form; and other ministers extend his foot, until the hip joint returns to its place, and the signs are that he flexes his leg well at his knee leicht; and put the plaster on, and make him raise his leg to the knee, and join them together firmly for III days or IV, then loosen him. And do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, so administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the leg, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never displaced, and never completely dislocated, and in and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and lean before the part where it is dislocated: let us gently ramie, and we must gently extend with our hands when it is only slightly displaced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from the top, so that you make sit the patient upright, and take it by the leg, above the ankle; then bring the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, and then extend it upward, and blow strongly on the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, by blowing and bringing the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, begin again the work, for it will come back; and if it does not come back, so make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and put a staff firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie sheets around it, so that he does not move the patient; then take the leg by the ankle, and each minister extends equally, and the staff is held close between the pacient's thighs to hold the patient still while you stretch him; then make the minister who is holding the leg sit upright with his hands, and the other ministers extend the foot at its end, so that he holds the foot firmly above the ankle; then bring the foot back to you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, and then blow strongly on the foot, and do this twice, as we have said, by blowing and bringing the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, begin again the work, for it will come back; and if it does not come back, so make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and put a staff firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie sheets around it, so that he does not move the patient; then take the leg by the ankle, and each minister extends equally, and the staff is held close between the pacient's thighs to hold the patient still while you stretch him; then make the minister who is holding the leg sit upright with his hands, and the other ministers extend the foot at its end, so that he holds the foot firmly above the ankle; then bring the foot back to you with your right hand, and then with your left two times, and then blow strongly on the foot, and do this twice, as we have said, by blowing and bringing the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, begin again the work, for it will come back; and if it does not come back, so make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and put a staff firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie sheets around it, so that he does not move the patient; then take the leg by the ankle, and each minister extends equally, and the staff is held close between the pacient's thighs to hold the patient still while you stretch him; then make the minister who is holding the leg sit upright with his hands, and the other ministers extend the foot at its end, so that he holds the foot firmly above the ankle;
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is set in place, put the plaster on top of it and form it, and fasten the foot to the leg, and ward off the tendons that are behind the ankle, so that the ligatures are not too tight; then let it be for II days or III, and if the strapping has loosened, then release it after a third day, and let the patient go by IV days; and if he goes before this term, it is not yet certain that he will still dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess forms on the foot, so that you can calm it down, as we have said elsewhere, as long as it is healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so that they can be smoothly extended without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are in either of the two feet, so that you can make the patient sit on a plain or  .ie. table all straight, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press upon your foot with form, until it has recovered; and when it is even, and there is no more opening, then strap the sole of the foot to a chair at II joints, then form the strapping, and let it be for III days, then release it; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in the cure, unless you are skilled in the art and have used it long ago, and unless you are compassionate and tardy, do not be bold; and use at first soothing things for an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, now bring the limb back to its place, so that the abscesses come; and when the limbs are in their places, administer drying ointments, and cure the wound, as it should be, with balms; and if there is a fracture with dislocation, and small bones are broken, set the bone, and do what we have said for simple illnesses; and guard against entering the path of fear, according to what I said, because this will cost you much according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
