O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the final word on the science of medicine in its entirety, and I have brought it to an end through my explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this treatise for you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say, "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work by hand is well-established in our region and is entirely strange to all, it is a very difficult science and requires a great deal of skill, and is not delayed by the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive it with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanations and declarations and abbreviations; and I will come with the shapes of the ferments of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the addition of the declaration and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because good masters of hands are not found in our times, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so much that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and the movement and resting places, and the location of their exits.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hipocrates says that the less with the more is the work, and the work with the hand, and most of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not aware of the things mentioned above, let him not try to do anything so that he does not make a mistake and does not harm people; therefore, I have often warned many of those who deal with this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman, and also cut the arteries in her neck; for so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took out a piece of the bladder and the man died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen a patient called for surgery, and saw the dislocation of the disease and the size of the stone, and he would surely die if it were removed.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took a duc from our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was also a wound; and the doctor of ignorance pulled the break on top of the wound with great pain, and left no scar on the wound, and ended so; and he commanded that it should not be removed; and it delayed so that the leg was all rotten and the feet came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I did so, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of corruption were already established in that member, and it cannot be healed; and the corruption does not cease to spread through the member as long as the members are all lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another mirage that would turn into an abscess, then it would inflame from the evil of its own essence.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is purulent with melancholy humor, never comes except that one touches it with iron in a place where it can be all removed what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because, poor son, you need to know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, work in which there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For so that it may please you to take care of yourself, that the foolish mirth cannot speak ill of you; If you take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that, through the grace of God, you come to salvation and be loosed; and leave the possible diseases of grief health; and keep your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiénus then says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on yourself the care of a bad illness lest you be called a foolish mirth.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the following chapters are ordered from the top down to the bottom; and the forms of the instruments, and the ironing tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters deal with dissection and perforation, suction cups and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapters also describe the order and shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; it also provides details on the preparation of the shoulder blades and the shapes of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, we must remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of help and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and its answers hidden; and many wise men would speak about it, and agree with what I say; and I am short of words because I shorten the long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps all colors of skin where there is matter; for in one color there is heat and matter, and in another dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, some agreed and said that cautery was great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is not worth anything to disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor from dryness; and he who spoke the opposite said that cautery was great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in with men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all way, there is none who knows it but he who has tried it, and who knows by long practice the composition of the cautery, and the variety of complexions in men, their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their remedies and the space of time; otherwise we have no fear even for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of this will come together and agree with the cauterizing.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery is more effective if it is applied to the open wound, and it has greater power than cautery with a hot tool.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is burned, and harms no other member by mistake.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The hot medicines come from one member to another by moving away, and cause diseases of great pain in the member; and fire, because of its height and power of its substance, does not hurt unless it is in excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experience and from the long service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I beg your pardon for the length of the speech, for I do not like to keep you waiting, but please accept in your thoughts the secret that is revealed through fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his arguments; so receive it.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be made in what time they must be done, and let them be prayed.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, for since the resulting harm can be prevented by the aid of cauterization; and most importantly, the cauterization is done because of the necessary pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm does not come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think as some fools do; because the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they think, for cauterization is only a medicine that changes the appearance, and dries up the humors that cause pain; and it is better than medicine in terms of its speed in bringing about healing, and due to its virtue and nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And a possible thing is that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauterization of the deep due to pain, and similar things, and partial pain does not return again; but it happens a little.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And so open well, for fire cauterization is the medicine of derriers, not because of the intention of foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And so open well, for fire cauterization is the medicine of derriers, not because of the intention of foolish men. The ancient ones said that cauterization instruments made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they said that the heat of gold and its high quality are what make them useful; they also said that the heat of a gold cautery does not cause scarring, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that in some people it does cause scarring; and a gold cautery heals faster than an iron one, as they used to say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however, when you heat an instrument made of gold, you will not recognize it by the color of gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it goes out on fire; and in this way there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter up to the point where the vision becomes clearer so that you can more easily find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is useful for moist and cold conditions of the head, especially in cases of "soda" disease and various humors that descend from the scalp, ears, and a multitude of headaches and pains in the teeth and jaw, as well as similar diseases caused by cold, such as paralysis, sodiness, apoplexia, and other similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the disease should be expelled by a solitive medicine that rinses the head three or four times, depending on the virtue and acuity and the patient's accustomedness to it so as to endure it; and then rinse the head of the patient again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the crossbar between your hands, and put his hands on some meat; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his II eyes; and leave your two ends, if it bleeds, then heat the cautery which is called "olive", by which there is this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place the crossbar between your hands, and put his hands on some meat; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his II eyes; and leave your two ends, if it bleeds, then heat the cautery which is called "olive", by which there is this form:
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And said the old man, that the longer the wound remains open, the more it seeps; and for this reason if the wound is treated promptly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said none of them that one must let the cauterize so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And said another that one must let the cauterize so long on, and press so hard that one takes off of the bone as much as women put in their brassieres to get rid of humors; and one must let the wound remain open for a long time; after it must be cured and treated.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all cases, except in certain men who have a tendency to fear; and it seems to me that I should let them remain open; for the head is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we see with other members; and moreover, when the head of the ill person is weak by nature, and the first application of cauterization is more safe and gentle on mine, and of this I use to operate in a way that helps to save it.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the child's pain from head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head is in pain and it lasts for a long time, then one should use herbes and pills that are called "cochia", and head-washing and oils and poultices; and if one does the fire cautery that we have mentioned above, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him only a little as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have made the fire cautery over each of the patient's horns as we have said above, and you have made a hole at the base thereof, so that one can put leeches there; and place the leeches therein; and place your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the horn cauteries be made narrower than those by which one cauterizes the skin of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	A fire cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain in one side of the neck occurs and persists up to the oil, and the shoulder is dislocated by medicines that cause fever, and the other cures I mentioned in the division of diseases do not help: then make two kinds of cauterizations, namely with water medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with water medicine is done as follows: You squeeze a piece of aloes, and then remove the skin and cut it in two pieces, and then apply it to the shoulder in the form of a temple or band where the pain persists, so that you can put back the aloes on the skin; and when it has been re-applied, let it rest for twelve hours; and then remove it and treat with garlic oil, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton dipped in wax until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of ointment as long as he is healthy; and if you see that this one of some burning medicines that I have written or dozed out in the doctor of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clod or there is a little curve, and put it on top of the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the burn wound is burned; and remove your hand so that the artery does not hurt, which is hot, and run a lot of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in silk, and put it on the spot for three days; then I put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the sore place with ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer that is called "cultellare", at the very tip, and beware of sealing the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of headaches
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	For headaches: When you treat headaches as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauterization before mentioned with medicine and iron does not suit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and so mark on the painful spot a line of half a finger long, and raise your hand once, and draw back so that you do not cover the artery and do not come up to the bone; and guard against the mandible that moves when it is bitten, and let rest only that which is mute and that spasms do not come to the disease, and guard against the release of blood from the artery when it is covered, or when it has been covered with great fear and mostly by those who do not know, and who are students and untested; and leave the work in half a way; but I will tell you how to stop headaches when the artery is covered, and I will show you at what point it takes effect in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient suffers, cauterize him with fire on the top of the head as well, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said or the extract of the artery with the cautery having two knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied soluble medicines and other treatments which we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this fire which is called "poins," of which form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying fire to the entire ear that hurts, or to both sides where the pain is felt at the root of the ear, and keep it burned for X minutes; then treat the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	that must be cured by fire is only of those that move with a stream, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases; and not to make any fire on similar things that come from thirst and spam of blood.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this torture of the mouth that moves with a stream of fluid from the throat and gargling, and not worth it, then you must make three fire treatments: one in the root of the ear, another about a finger further away from the temple, and the third at the joining of the two lips; and place the fire on the part that is healthy, and let the fire burn halfway; and this is the form of the fire:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the scalpel that we have put before you is a little more delicate, and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; after healing, keep it as I said above until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexies are old and you treat them in this way as we have said, they do not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: II on the two horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I put it in a pot as we have said before, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured in this way as we have said above.
de litargie	of limestone
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient great years and pills to take away the brain; after healing the whole head of the patient, and put on his occiput a plaster of saffron which is written or treated plasters; and this is the way of the cauterization: if you do so as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy then it is good, and if not, he does three fire cauterizations on the top of his head down to the collarbone, and there should be space between each cauterization of two inches in width; and treat him as you would the others, and if he appears to struggle, the patient suffers, so do one in the middle; and if it is necessary, do two more on either side of the two horns, and treat him until he is well, and the cauterizations that are called "olive-wraps" should be done as I have said above.
de la froidor dou chief	of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with dirt and water as we have said above; after washing the head of the patient, then he does a fire cauterization on top of his head and one on each horn, and one behind and three along the spine of the neck; and if you need to, and the cors is moist and the patient suffers and is getting worse, do three cauterizations on the spine of the back; and let it be until the fire has burned the skin of the last cauterization, and lift your hand; after treating him until he is well, and the cauterizations that are called "olive-wraps" as we have said above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Of the epileptic, should only use fire cautery who is fluent, and first to wash the brain of yarrows and other cures that we have said in the division when the illness is great and suffering from poison medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear the poultice, let him gargle and chew washing the brain often with good meat; after that he places his head in the middle, and does the poultice according to what we have said before, and the poultice on the neck, and each horn; and if the illness is fierce and suffering, do the poultices as I have said to those who are paralyzed and weakened of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the poultices be olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is sick, make the fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excesses or corrusions and thick pus, then make the cautery partly as we have said above for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, there is excess decline towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink something to clear his mind, according to what it says here about it before the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cutting off the head of the patient; after making a well-formed tortue out of linen, also as a circle, if you put it around his head; and let the patient sit still and be held down well on all sides; then present the linen, and dip it in good bee wax; and heat it gently by fire so that he can bear it; then empty the circle out from inside the head and let it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with another good government, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see, to cauterize them by making dots everywhere with the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing dries out the brain as well; and then put on cotton wet with linseed oil and with sheep's-fat grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes to the hair, first of all, according to the signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and do this for the patient, purifying the brain, and warding off all moisture, and making him sweat or bath several times while fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, he orders him to re-set his hair, and he makes him sweat or bath several times while fast. After it has been set, he makes II cauteries on the II temples where it is dislocated from the hair, together, or if it is dislocated in one place, then it is set there; and guard against bleeding from the scalp, and if you see too much blood coming out, then restrain him so that he cannot move.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you how to cauterize during the extraction of arteries and the incision, how to stop it; and no one does cauterization or dismemberment of the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The heart's blood
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or squeeze the arteries which are in appearance at the base of the head; and one can see that it is of the cold and phlegmatic surplus, therefore I do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the chapter descending to the tears: I cauterize the top, and two cauterizes on the two temples, and two cauterizes where haters dismember the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes well on the temple a little cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The heart's blood from inside the tears
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you prepare the medicine as we have said in the division, and it does no good, then done three times take a drink of the disease; after that he raises his head, and makes a cautery with oil of olive in the middle; and make two cauteries with the cautery which is called "clavis" on the two scars, a little hair-cutting; and guard the artery so you don't cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	so that you know this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you do two cauteries on the two scars as long as the scars are; and don't let your hand off until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	with hair that points to oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has passed that the hair of the oils have been turned into the parched lands, and they touch the oil, and it is done on two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient on your table; afterwards sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the mirth, and this is the beginning of the sign to pluck the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and muskellaige (a type of resin) on the oil, then heat the cautery so that it has this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the wound little by little several times, so that the scar is burned in place; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retire, and the hairs stand up at the point of the oil; then lighten your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton wet in lard until the chapping is healed; after the cure of the wound until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on this same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural position, and even, and does not touch the hair the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a roll of parchment in the shape of a fern; then take French soap and very hot water, each a .z., and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it doesn't cool down, then pour it over the roll of paper; and if the illness holds only in one oil, then do it also with another; and dip the cotton wet in lard into an oven; and the patient's joints are in your hand and put your thumb on the medicine, and press it a little and move it all the time that the patient feels tingling from the medicine, for he feels tingling also as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have learned this lesson well, keep the medical treatment at your side.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blister has passed, lift up the bandage, and you will see the paper raised as if it were lifted by fire or incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put the medicine back on the place where the medicine has not worked, as long as your hair is long and even, and your eyes are in place; then put cotton soaked in vinegar on it until the burns are healed, after treating the injury that is called "diaphoresis" and others, as long as it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must bandage yourself well so that the medicine does not touch your hair.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after it, and the hair pricks in the oil, then repeat the medicine on that same place that has been softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after treating until it is healthy; and this is the form of the poultice of mint:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and height, and according to this, their constraints; and do not be answered with the right path to those whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit them, then it is appropriate that you make a cauterization according to this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient that he put his head in your clean; and wet the minsters of his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, do not shake his head; after dip cotton wet in wine or juice of pease on oil; after heat the cautery which is good: and place upon the head like the form of a goose feather, together that the lip is the cautery; if you see, then join one head to the other, and if you see, so too as an umbrella; but nevertheless, it who is placed is moved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is opened, and treat the pus, and dry it up; and if it has closed, so work on it, and firmly grasp the scar tissue with your hand below the oil, that your hands do not go mad; and place the cauterizer in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start cauterizing again, and do so as many times as you need to, and leave it for III days; after that put cotton soaked in grease on the wound, and dry out the healing with a drying medicine for as long as it is healthy, and if forty days have passed and it is still not healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat according to the chapter on this.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way of cauterizing fistulas, which no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Do you understand a fistula, and pierce it; then put in the slender tool with which this is done:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I pour the quantity of one.Z. of wine; and hold your hand firmly where the cautery is, so that the molten wine does not run to its oil; and it comes that you put on the cotton soaked in water or in ale to: the wine if artfully applied to the fistula, and it is cured per marvelously health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is cured by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, then let him give a blow to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what one should do in his own place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouth times have cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks from what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then warm a small surgical cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it directly in the cracks as long as it comes out clean; after treating with oil, let it dry up until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after having made a poultice and wrapped it and it becomes dry and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit: then it is appropriate that you have a cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes out at the bottom of it, and do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, as long as it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is appropriate to uncover the site and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	dou movement des dens
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; then heat the cautery whose shape will come later in a certain way that you place a cord on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and start again with the cautery according to your will; then fill the mouth of the sick person with salt water, and let it sit for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a certain way the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gums softened are restrained, and the moisture dries up and腐敗。
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or it is cold or wet, and medicines do not work, then there is a need for two kinds of cauterization: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cheesecloth, and the tip into a copper or bronze spoon; after take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and soak it in butter, and put on the tooth aching slowly and hold so long as it cools down; and thus often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and see if this butter, cotton and cotton wet is cold, and put on the tooth aching, and put on I copper hot as the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Cautery with fire if it is such that you squeeze a piece of iron or bronze, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, for then the shape will come out later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be sharp on the following day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then drink it down; and thus is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterized wound on the back of the neck, and according to what you can; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of a cold, moist flu and does not respond to digestive medicines, then heat the scalp with fire in order to prepare it, and after that comes the form: and make two openings for the fumes to exit on either side; and put the fire on the abscess once, where it belongs, until it reaches the root of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply fire according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and put cotton wet with butter on it as long as the burning is over; then treat with oils and poultices until he is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the dog:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the jaw, and most often when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be voided by restorative medicines; afterwards he makes the cautery at the root of the throat, and you should not go up to the throat, and do not cut off anything but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards he makes another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let be the cauteries which are called 'claws' so that we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the disease of the jaw is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorbutic disease, and it is an old illness, then he makes iij cauteries on the face according to the form which is before said; and another cautery goes down between the breasts. And let be the cauteries which are called 'claws' according to the form which is before described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make the fire cautery by puncturing all the cauterizations that are called "poins" of which the shape is as described above in the disease of the ears; and let the punctures be up to 30 or so.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterwards treat the wound according to what is said above, and let the cauterization be made in three layers according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those for whom the cauterization is lighter, make three of them together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards let the patient lie on his back and on his chest; then with the two fingers of your left hand reach inside the ear; and if the joint moves inwardly, then apply the fire cauterization in two layers according to this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize it as far as it pierces to the cost, and comes the shape of the cautery together with four cauterizes; and because it is done cauterization with the cautery which has three nerves, because the figure of cauterization are there cauterizes; and the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And no time is placed on this nerve because there are eight cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery, grind it with salt; after let rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, what happened there, then make cauterize on the thick of the cautery clave, or more than cauterizes in piercing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and moisture until it is taken away from its color, and there are many catarrhs to him, and the customs of the usual cures do not benefit him, then the patient should be swaddled around his body, and his legs and hands spread out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From then on he will make three cauterizations of the navel with fire, all cauterizations being clamped down, and two cauterizations along the sides as long as the shape of the cauterization is at three angles, and there should be a space between each of them so that they are not joined together when they burn; and may the shape of the cauterization be perfect so that it burns the two parts equally, and may the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you want to cauterize your stomach with a large fire, according to this form; and he who is afraid of this fire, cauterize by puncturing and pressing on the stomach in one point according to the quantity that you see fit, then cauterize it with all the fire that is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing process that we have described above, until he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it suffers from cold and moisture and strong wind, until it is separated from its natural composition due to excesses; and the patient is treated in accordance with what we have mentioned in the divisions, and it does him no good unless he becomes tired of his own evil; and sign of a line III cauterizes according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, leaving a space between each cauterize the size of two fingers; and let the cauterize be as long as the back of the neck, and do not press too much with your hand at all the cauterize; and let it be burned so intensely that half of it is consumed, and let the patient lie on his back; and if he cannot, then let him extend his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterizes of the cutlet, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the cure, for you would dry out all the body; and let it come no further than a pimple, for the cure is very subtle in place, and the saiges to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can discern whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, then feel that the patient feels little pain; and if it is in the capsule, then feel severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure has finished with the pus, it is necessary that the patient should be attentive to his head; and then sign with your finger where the abscess is, and then heat the cauldron which resembles the tip, from which comes:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cauterize until the fever is burnt, and come to syphac, as long as the poultice is all wet; after the cure according to the cure of the sweats until he is healthy; and it is not convenient that this cautery use any wet but those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by which these diseases have been corrupted no time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And now he can dare to work, and always it seems to me that he leaves it too long;
dou cautere de pleuresin	Dou cauter of pleurisy:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make a cauterization for pleurisy with roots of arzilla, and in this way: take a root of arzilla that is long, the largest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick as your two hands; and moisten it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize between the nipple and the collarbone, and three small cauterizations a little lower down on the side that is sore; and one cauterization under the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and one along both sides of the chest after the fire has gone out; and do not press your hand tightly, but rather open it widely as if you were smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no old man uses fire cautery like a razor, and he blows it and puts it between the ribs until it comes to the stump; and he jumps out of pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out which cannot be healed.
de la mice	for the mercy
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of mouse-poison which we have said in the division of cures, and it does not help, then they have devised three kinds of fire cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these three methods, one is that you make three fire cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the poison, according to the shape of the liver cauterization we have mentioned above; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, so that the patient shudders on his back; and another method of cauterization is that you heat the cauterization which has two ends, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the cauterization to the place where the cut of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation on which you apply the cauterization be according to the shape, according to the length of the spine, and the cauterization is according to the width of the spine.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, the two roots are heated until the burn is felt on the other side, and then the fire is quickly removed, and in doing so there will be three; and if you see it, cauterize to the whole root with three roots.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After he has gotten the wound by long time, and that is a must that the other before said cure get it.
de ydropisie	from hydrops
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work for hydrops, except that which is called "ascultation.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is appropriate that you make three cauterizations around the body, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the back of the spine, and one on the navel; and let the cauterization be well placed to the skin of the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the fire cautery to go away long time, and do not let the treatment of the disease after the cautery; and healing would hurry, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is the claw that we have before us to use; and this for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is now described.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the pieces
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the pieces are swollen on the one who is hydrophylic, and they are plain of a yellow color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and the middle finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it back.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much too deeply, lest he should burn the yellow color, and the cautery is made according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe à la pointe dou cutellaire ; et soit li cauteres du long, l'un desoz le genoil devant et l'autre defuers, enmi la jambe ; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse ; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.
de la menoison	After doing the fire cautery on both legs up to the knuckle of the big toe, and making one cautery longer than the other, closer to the knee joint, leave the cauterizations in place for a long time without treating, because they will dry up  ; after that, treat the other leg in the same way.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When a solution comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and vitalizing power that is in the stomach and intestines remains afleboie [i.e., affluente, meaning 'abundant'], it cannot be cured by any kind of treatment; and you will see the patient suffer greatly and have great vitality, so make a large fire cautery on the stomach according to what has been said above about the fire cautery of the stomach, circulating it around; and four cauterizations around the navel very gently, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the sick suffering, then do fire cautery on his hand, and I cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries on the stomach to take away the great one, for the cure is helpful when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or more, and are old and have large cold and moist corrupting humors, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit if fire cautery is done: three on the spine of the back, that which is all further down is cut little by little in a trialing manner, and one cautery is cut there II times; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and inflammation appears on the face, then the face is given I great cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse at all the cauterized clavicles; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, leave the wound alone until it is well.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnage that is called "the flesh
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the carnage, if it is hot, heat the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all on fire on the treated carnage; and leave it until the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, so that it does not hurt; do this once or twice, and if there is much carnage, cauterize each one as we have said; after treatment with beneficial ointments until they are well; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will be more effective.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound that has not been properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate cuts or openings, which we will describe in their place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no opening for the vent, and it is raised up and there is putrifaction and moisture, then you must provide an entire subtle tent, and remember to know exactly how much the tent is perfect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restarting the cauterization until the corruption and putrefaction of the skin are burned, once or twice, according to the quantity of the necessary application; and be careful of the nerves that are involved, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the back of the abdomen and the intestine, then be careful of these veins, and do not make a cut except in the meat, and think that it is not permanent; after treating the area until it is healthy, and if the matter has become stuck, and the bones have been exposed for a long time, then know that the vein is completely healthy; and if the matter has not become stuck, but the bone is corrupted at its base, then know that the vein is three-quarters healthy, and the bone is corrupted at its root; and in this way, as one of these that we will say in his place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys and the great windiness comes, and does not take hold of a woman, then it is right that you make a fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the clava cautery which we have before said; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizes in line, and greater help will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak because of cold and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then you make a fire cautery in the back part on the bladder, where the hairs grow at the base, and one on each side, and let each be as long as an inch; and you make another fire cautery behind, where it is needed; and let the clava cauterys be made according to the form mentioned above.
de la marris	of the marrows
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are decayed and late in appearing; and when they do appear, there is great pain: therefore three cauterizations should be made around the loins, as we have said above for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations on the back; and let the cauterization be clived, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be swollen, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip socket at the circle-like spot, and mark in front of the joint around the socket as it comes back together, so that the socket is within the circle; and if so, let the cautery be like those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have the fire caustice ready, then make three caustices of the olive oil, and make them complete like all the others; and heal as long as he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as mentioned in the previous division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, make the caustice; and the manner of the caustice is as follows: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire caustice.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire caustice is according to many ways, of which one is: you should make three triangular caustices according to this shape, and make them deep and wide, and there between each caustice let the thickness of a thumb, and let the olive oil caustice; never do you make a caustice in the middle on top of the hip joint, for there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery is made with the ring that we have said above in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the rings hold all the hip, and all the flesh of the cure is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach until the thigh or only until the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes only to the thigh and leg, two cauterizations are made there where the patient feels the pain, and one cauterization above the ankle three times, five times at the most; and either the cauterization is done with a knife, and either the thickness of the flesh is burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or almost to the ankle, cauterize there four times or five with the "poins" cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if you do this profession, do it more; and if he says that the pain is in the groin towards the thigh, make a cauterization with the cautery knife or circular, and give him good care for all your cauterizations so that you don't let them go out so much with the cautery that you burn the nerves and the big arteries, and do not cause great harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who made a cauterization on the foot's sole, and left it so much that the leg was all swelled, and the toes too, and they were pierced and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal remedy from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, make a cauterization in one and the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cauterization of the heel, from which this is the way, make it one large as an nail of a finger, or slightly less, and put it between the intertrigemial spaces, and be the intertrigemia on both sides, and are also like nails, and there is one piece of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the chest box of the sick leg, and turn it over the back side; and let him cauterize once, and he will cauterize and leave three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the opened wound for a long time; after the cure of dressing until it is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Al-Buqaqum says that we use little of this cautery because of the risk of infection, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery, which can bear it, and let it be where it sticks.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical cauterization with hot instruments so that you make an instrument to pass through the edge of the door, and is of brass or iron with a long wall, and there are two of us, and there is a quantity of thickness of a finger on each side according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you have treated the hip joint of the sick person lying on his side near the spine, and you have moved your hand very high up over the hip joint; after that you should enter between the two circles of hot awd which is heated with fire one pot, and leave it for an hour from now, and allow the patient to feel heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is the same as fire; and when the mortification has passed, you take off your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with soft awd, and leave it like that for three days, and put it on tar until what is black from the scald has grown out; and let it be three days to heal; and whoever is behind should help after the treatment of onions as long as he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread only to the thigh or only to the leg, you make the instrument turn towards what you have done in the hip joint; and this is the way of hot awd, and I have written it and treated it with rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live chalk, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkali and live chalk, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot. There should be a small opening at either end so that the powder can fall through; then place another pot, well sealed, on top of the alkali and chalk and add water gently to it, so that there are two layers of powder above the water; and leave it like this until the water is completely evaporated and the pot is empty, then take all the water out, and pour it over the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it is very strong and very dry in the work of medicine and cautery of other members; for it does this work like fire, and with other medicines which well cauterize the skin together with resin, honey, almond, and soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a cure wherein an honorable man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and he mowed his grass, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was healed on one soul when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you grind the green and dry barley, and mix it with a little fat, and put it on the hip and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and leave it; and let it lie for III hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then he puts it into the bath as long as his body is a little awake, and he puts him into bed, and the pain will go away all and will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's hair, it should be done in this way; and the cautery must be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and burn it with oil, and put it on the pit which is between the thumb and the other finger called the foist.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take a dry goat' hair, and hold it to fire until it turns to ashes, and lay it on the wool, and leave it there until it is blackened; and then do it again, and never cease doing it as long as you think that it comes to the ankle, and the pain ceases; and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterizing with a goat' hair".
de la dolor dou dos	of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by chewing or from impact or from too much evacuation, or by the appearance of spread cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterizing, except that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	He must after that which the sick person is voiding of foul pills or others, be done to him on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with inch, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to virtue and quantity which the sick can suffer; and let the cauterization be made according to the cautery called 'pin'; and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the cautery clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes about in small children, and the signs of the beginning are that he has a narrow back when he stands up, and he is afraid; and you will find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes over the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and when you have seen it, if you cure him with the cauldron of a cauldron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery is applied to each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you can see, then cauterize inside the spine with the burning cautery two or three lines, and let the burns be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply the burn to a ganglion that is in the same place as a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the joints' pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which is called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it is cured with burns in this way: Make the burn of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary for you to touch on the face of the foot, then make fire cautery with all the fire cautery that is claimed "not".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come again to the genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, then make fire cautery on each testicle III cauterizes or IV of each part, with all the olive cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand away from it except for as long as the skin of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend again to the genitals and the back, then administer the fire cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make a line with the fire II lines; and if there is still pain in the two, then make fire cautery on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come again to the arms or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and govern well the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do good government and purge phlegm, then you will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the treatment of disease
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in the ankles, and the balls descend like fresh grass, then it is necessary that when you look at him, he should not be able to move for a while; and he uses things that leave his belly cold, so that the end descends from his belly; after he sits down on his back between your hands, and orders him to wet his hair as long as his balls are repaired, and brings them back to your feet, and signs from above the rupture on the bone of the leg, and all is like a half-circle above the chest; then heat the cautery in such a way:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and drops water.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then return the balls to their place; and the assistant wet his hand so that it does not turn back; and well treat the legs of the sick person, and put a bag and a servant on the legs, and another one on his feet which wet his hands; then put the fire brand on all his hand, and hold it tight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so you will start again a second time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the ball does not slip when you make the mark; that you do not burn it; and that by this sick person does not die, or another bad.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come to the bone with the fire brand, your efforts are in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the fire brand of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure; after III days cure the place of the brand of butter until the heat is taken away; after the cure other oils until he is well, and let the sick person lie for 40 days on his back until the wound is well fixed; and it is necessary that his bandages be relaxed for a long time, so that the ball does not slide when he gets up to go to the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is brought to him and applied for forty more days; and he should have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too much noise; and when he has done this teaching, then is he completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of the cutter in its paste.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then do I cauterize the third of the cure according to its quantity, and let it be burned; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the elders has said that it should be cauterized at III angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the top of the incision and make a line across its width, and another on the other side, and with your hand push all the way down the nail.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, or from a blow or from a wound, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medicine cure does not help, then it is convenient that he be cauterized at the fire which is called "poins", and let the cauterization be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is well, that's good; but if not, restart another cauterization on that same member, for it is necessary that you make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of salivation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The meself are aided by cauterization in a great way, and at most the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if there is any confusion everywhere; and it loses manifestly, so that you must cauterize this from the cauterization we said at the top of the head, and I cauterize in some neck, and II cauterize on the spine of the neck, and VI cauterize on the spine of the back, and I great one on the crown and another deliciously, and II on the two shoulders; and II on the blades, and II on the tendons of the foot, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the creases of the hands; and guard against any burn that is on the back of the leg, so that you do not burn it; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the hand, and another one on the stomach bone, and another one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I make a caustic, the more aid I give and profit, and know that the patient does not feel the pain of the caustic as much as the healthy do because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the caustic be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, cure him with flour of times with honey and other cures until he is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healthy, then make the cauterization on the member according to its size; and let the cauterization be a little inside the curative; and then cure it with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is there when cauterization should be made with the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and so if it is osteal the swelling; but nevertheless do not meddle in it unless you know the members and the issues of the moving vessels.
de albaras	of scars
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and the medicine's power is useless, then cauterize with a fire cautery a little perfectly, according to the quantity of the spice of cure, until the blister is opened, and its color changes; then treat with flour of vesces and lentils with oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and almond, each in part; and mix them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply to the place until they are healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for leprosy by cauterization:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leprosy appears at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the cautery with the fire seems a circle, all around the edge of the leprosy.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And always the wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the leprosy; and this to me seems not good, for I fear it will become ulcers and rotten, and I have never seen this done at all; and more right is to cauterize around, with the fire called "circle," as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying or because of the excess blood the person has, or because he is very old and has little blood, or because of age; then you will see him hurry to die: then cauterize him with small fire cauteries by piercing him; then leave him like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see him pierced all over with fire, so hot is the fire of this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterizes have pierced his pulse, and are such cauterizes that the patient feels cold in some way so that the course of corruption is controlled.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of sickness is called "corrosion," and it is nothing other than a putrefaction of the limbs, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire dries up the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in its early stages, treat it with fire simultaneously on all sides; then heat the fire cloves small and large according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after fire treating from all sides until all corruption disappears, leaving nothing of it except that everything corrupted becomes bone.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days and put fire-treated clove broaches on top until the burns from the fire have healed and all corruption has disappeared.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with garlic-based remedies that cause a burn.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that a boy does not come out healthy, it is good; and if he does not, let the cauterization begin again on him who has been delayed in his place corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mentation is never once cured of medicine agony in place of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicine agony in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come to the stone
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	In many cases, it happens that because of the weather, a disease called "close" according to our intention appears, and is a large, foul thing that blisters the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease has two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to be understood cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Here is the translation of the text: 
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with poultice until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the skin turns red and sometimes blisters, and there are many times that they come off and get stuck to something, then you should bring a hot water poultice; and in this way: take a hair from a horse or a iron, or a feather from a crow, and put it on the nail and the ointment, that is to say porpynx verrucae; and put the hair on it so that it turns red all around, then put some hot water on it, and hold your hand tight, and press your hand while turning it so that the edge of the hair comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water's path deeply up to the root; and let the patient feel a little burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will come out all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make another one like this until you have removed all those who are in the body, then heal the wounds that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	He heals the trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver from cold, or from a quarter fever or other, so that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization at the feet, and one cauterization on the stomach with olive oil; this will stop the shivering, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No one appears on the body that has purulent pustules, which come from corrupted bulk.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If the first time that they appear one makes a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a thin cauterization with a twig of mistletoe, which is held in the fire, or a root of aristo long, or with a ring-shaped cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.
quant li artere est copee	And at no time are the cauterizations performed at the beginning when it appears, according to this method, and they cannot grow hair in advance, but the excess that comes is broken, and they are cured; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	For many times there is great pain of blood from the artery that is cut to the wound that comes to the surface, or to the incision of an abscess, or to the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a painful thing to stop it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case when it is done to anyone, if you are quick to put your little finger on the wound of a vein, and strain it as much as the blood stops flowing from it, and no more drops; then take fire with olive oil, large and small, as much as it is all red; then take I, or great or small according to the wound and place it in that place where you hold your little finger, and keep the cauterizer on it until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if he pricks when you lie on your back, and the cauterization is finished, take quickly another of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the sick person; and know that when the artery stops [bleeding], it cannot be well stopped even if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not yet been treated, or by firmly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop blood; and let it be bound and strained well.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the stopping of the blood tightly with cloth or with burning things placed on it, or similar things, if he does not benefit from it, let him not do so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Et si ce arrive à aucun et il n'ait mie miré ne médecine présent, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nous avons dit, et bien étendre tant qu'il soit resté sur chés le plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou mouille d'avoine froide souvent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenéchis; et face des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cautères et de médecine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	And if this happens to anyone and he has not seen a physician or medicine, then he must put his second finger on the wound in the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and over the vein; and do not move it, but often moisten it with cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened and firm; and make incisions before those who need cauterization and medicine.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here begins the second book of cures for cuts and wounds; in which we will treat of fire cauterization, burning medicine, scrapings, causes, instruments, and shapes of cauterizations; and I have put this chapître from the root to the tip, and I will go into this chapître by that middle way for those who have a lighter wound to treat.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for that reason greater caution is needed.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I forbid you to be foolish.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of doing things come about.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who, with their disease, die easily because of the foolishness that they practice because of their disease, and because of its great severity, then one must be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these ones who give you your meaning, and say: "Wait, I am getting ready"; and the disease is a mockery.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not appropriate that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great trust in your honor than in your covetise, and do not open foolishly but carefully of him whom you are certain, and of whom you could have taken and lost; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health is converted; and he who will help you to obtain good name, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you will seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in speaking by chapters, according to the one who is before or the chapter of the cautery, which I have devised from the beginning up to the point, so that you can find more easily that of which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often comes to infants when the mouth is drawn tight, and there is no reply for this reason:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease come to anyone but children, and all those I have seen it affect die quickly; and by what I see, I should be more cautious in treating these cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with water, and the head of the bone was pushing out through the skin every day until it could no longer be sustained; and the moisture was so great that he believed he would die, and this moisture had gathered between the joint and the bone, and the joint was very small, so that you would have to make a large cut in the head with a knife; and let it hang out as far as possible:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in a cross shape according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has broken the bone, and you see the joints of the skull overflow on each side, and the liquid jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand, and it does not close again: then you should make three incisions in the skull according to this form:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with ointments and oils, and let the scalp be stripped evenly, and feed the patient dry meat because of the moisture as long as the limb is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to cut is that you look where the large part of the abscess is and the gathering of the sharp part; because it is not in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut at the large part of the abscess and the gathering of the sharp part, and make an incision according to your ability; and be careful not to cover the artery; and let there be a flow of blood, so that the patient dies because of the blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	in conclusion
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	In conclusion: When there is a disease that is called "cataract" or "pit", and the disease is old, and the medical cure does not benefit, then the last cure is that of cauterization with what one will cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary therefore, since you have covered the eyes, that the patient should raise his head; after which he rubs the place of a hard cloth until the arteries appear, and then removes the patient's collar from all the cloth; then see where the vein bites, and the lines of both are after the ears, and few are returned; then sign the lines of the chin, and then cover one and the other with a sharp spatumile from two sides, until the saw comes to the bone, and that may be through the large part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, bottle the spatumile above the artery and cover it from above, cutting as well as two sides as a tree.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, let it run upward constantly without ceasing.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, and then sign the chin and cut up to the bone; and that which it is necessary to put fire on, so it is six-quarters, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the expansion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no syphac, if the cut apices do not i come, then extract the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old grind comes, and catarrh is acquired, because of the moisture of tears and fever in the temples and ancient sore forsened and similar things, and it is medicated by the methods of medicine and all that does not benefit him, let us extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient does not let his hair grow in his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens very well with its pounding, and is not too tightly closed except in some men who are too cold; and if it is tightly closed, then the patient takes off some sheets, then he rubs the place with no rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum where this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then burn the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then draw it up as much as possible with pincers, and remove all the flesh that is attached to each part; and if the artery is small, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, then neither does the blood flow into all parts.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw blood from the six to three; and if the artery is large, then tie it with two strong threads of silk, so that blood does not come out before the wound heals, and comes out in turn; then, if you see, then cauterize with cautery cutellaire as far as the bone as soon as the shoulders are cut; and this is the operation of the doctor, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is an aid to stop moisture; for this is more of an aid than moisture itself.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill their place with wet cotton and put a well-made bandage on top; and when you remove them, use dry medicines that make charred bandages, and bandages, until they are healed; and if there is no stop to the artery as long as you work, quickly apply a cauterizing paste, or employ the juice of vitriol and strain it into your hand so that the stop is made; and if you do not have this present, put your finger in water as cold as possible for a long time, and remove it so that the stop is made as it should be; and the one that is bloody and heavier during the extraction of the artery is to be cauterized from both sides with a sharp instrument, but let the sharp instrument be well sharpened so that it lasts longer in heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it keeps less of its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have between the two tools a space of one inch, and then when you have sighed across the two lines, and you put on very hot iron as far as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and be distant between the two shoulders because it is not souded by this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on the forehead of the head of force, and this does not benefit from medicine that is made there, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel a feverish movement as if it were shivers; and since they are soft and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall, and the eyelids are burned by the heat of the tears, and are scorched by the fire of the tear
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et let them call the ancient "cure for contusions", and that is that you make to rere to the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has or forehead, then he does III slits or forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and be one of the slits as II doi all emmi the forehead in swallowing swallow until not ifef, and the others II at II costels by above the papers, and keep away from the incision of the arteries that are II costels by above the papers; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II mandibules, and be each wound the quantity of III does through joins; and have arranged a piece of sponge and many drapes her to essuer the blood, then bottle the sputum gained of II parts of where this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And let the incision that is to be made on the temple until the second incision; and peel all of the cur which is between the II slits up to all the medicine that is on the bone, then do another with the same incision until the other second, and then remove this sputum thoroughly.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If there is any moisture in the first cut of the instrument called a "culteller", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft, not sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And measure the cutting edge towards the back of the car at its end, and make it soft towards the bone, and measure it so that it comes to the moisture in the first cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cover all the vessels that descend from the top of the head at the hairline as long as the incision is continuous up to that which opens at the back, and then in the other way make it in the moisture in the first cut until the other side; and then remove the hair evenly, and express the blood carefully; then put in each cut a tent of fine cotton cloth, and put there drapings wet with wine and oil and vinegar, and keep so that the abscesses do not come; and on the third day unbind the bandage, and introduce great quantities of cold water, and then cure it with basilicon ointment made with oil and rosewater, and with other cures for wounds as long as it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	dough remakes of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is catarrh from habit, and you see the eyes twitch and shrink, and weaken vision, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and at its root it hurts painfully, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from a single vein, but from many.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a large cut at the front, and another across it with a broad knife.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and make an incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when you yawn; and when the bone is exposed, then soak all the blood with a sponge, and then wipe between the II lips of the cut and put cotton wicks, and wet them with linseed oil; then lay bandages soaked in wine and oil on top, and keep the apathema warm; when it has healed, then treat it with things that dry out, which cause itching.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of flour and three parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to stop the flow of blood throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The stopping of bleeding from the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is found in the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, stones or similar objects such as iron; seeds, beans, peas; flowing things such as water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is found in the ear a stone or any other thing that does not fit into the ear, do not put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, distil no violet oil or oil of sesame, but extract it; and when the ekstremity comes, stop the nostril with pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear to the sky.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth of times comes up strongly through this treatment; and if it does not come up strongly, then it is administered extraction with fine pincers, from which there is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes up strongly with the pincers, it is good; but if not, then it is administered extraction with a fine tiny hook; and if it does not come up with this, then make an air-hole in the back of the ear very well, and stop up that which is inside the ear with soft wax so that the flow cannot enter with the water; then the treatment is completed, for many times it comes up as we have said; and if it does not come up in any way, then take some glott (a liquid) in which the ousia (the fluid) are taken, and put in some instrument which is appropriate for that to be done, and place a little cotton in; then press the glott on the stone or something, and treat.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out of all these things that we have said, then you hurry to cut the ear in such a way that it is warm and twitchy; and the manner of the cut so that you first heal the headache of the head, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the sick person sit between your hands and turn the ear upside down, and cut a small cut in the root of the ear into fat where it is dependent; and let the cut be as much like the moon as you come to stone, then take the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully into your mouth; and the cure until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a grain that has gotten in and has swollen, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer the sputum of thin water according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make the incision of that seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the seed is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have done it many times; then extract it with small tweezers and at the hair Follicle, as we have said, so that the extractions are regular.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	So then, when the patient has a headache, he should use cold compresses first, and pad the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be washed in that ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it doesn't hurt, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it doesn't hurt, that's good. Take a few drops of this liquid between your thumb and index finger and gently heat it up a little bit on the fire; then put one end in the patient' ear, and pierce it from the other side, and keep piercing from one side to another, and don't stop until the water has all come out, and so it has all gone; and if you see anything, take a piece of straw, and wrap one end around the fire for a moment, then put that end in the patient' ear, and pierce again with the other side; and make many holes in this way until the water has all come out, as we have said in the case of the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small horn, as a flea or similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large horn so that one can feel it, then perform the extraction with tweezers; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, then extract them with very small tweezers; and if there are none, take a hair from where it is shaped.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And squeeze the ear very gently according to the quantity of the pain of the patient, and then extract the worm form all of it; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they don't obey by pulling out the cotton thread as I said on the stone; and if they don't come out with force as we said, administer distillations that the old ones tried in the lancing of worms, and you will find them or treating of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if there is silver or gold, desoto the small holes, and above the worm to distill; and to press within the distillation into the instrument of brass well made for this, and if you see take a razor and wrap it with cotton forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the thread, and let the thread be in the ear; then bottle the razor into all the cotton, and press your hand gently as long as the oil is distilled or flowing from the ear; and let the smell of the medicine go within, and let the distillations be well heated on the fire as they are distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the bumping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no piercing in his ears; and this same thing happens to men by the bumping of a wound, or of a char in the ear, and this bumping sometimes enters completely into the ear, if one cannot see it; and never happens that there is not a pierce, and one sees well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	This one that comes completely, if one cannot see it, is of great healing in many dispositions, and in this one you see the operation apparent; if the patient has all this spittle-like substance out of which the form is made:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be ageless and trenchant in front and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the operation is a char nee or cors of the ear, if it holds the subtle scars, and covers lightly, until this char is completely ossified.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if his piercings are even in the ear, then take a fine light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, and then put the ring into the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if you feel the piercing in the ear that causes a sharp pain, pierce it lightly and be careful not to hurt the ears of the ear; then put a plug in the ear according to its width, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make sure to do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a plug and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with vitriolic brooms; and if you see the ear ooze, be sure to remove the plug and take out another plug that is moistened with rosin oil and wax, until the oozing stops; then treat it until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that soothe the pain of the ear, which are or treat the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper stack
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Cut the roots of the herbs when they are moist and dry, so that you spread them with shears and pincers, and place them on a piece of glass; then put vinegar over them.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled, then cauterize them with the small, soft fire-cauterizer, and cauterize again after cutting them; and often peel them, because nothing stays attached to their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
de la gresle	of the griddle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	often come in papers some things that seem like rust on the paper's surface and hardness, and for this disease is called "grandine", and is a collection of moisture large in the paper above and above; the work is such: take care if the grandine goes from one side to the other, and it is a light thing to know; then cut the broad side, then scorch each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and chop it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing a bit into the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the fracture is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ointment will soon restore it and cause injury.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the fracture is descending inward toward the ear from above, flip the paper over, and pin it down with two pins, pressing one on each side; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not harm the patient; and when the fracture has been pinned, let oil of salt water be used, and treat the site where it has gone deep until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the oils
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is an ointment that is created from the oils of paper webs, and it happens more often in children than in adults, and hurts their eyes, and their tears hasten to them by morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because of the ointment that opens in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the shoulder to your side and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method for this operation is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then take a linen blanket, and set up a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of exit between each part, and then put it on him; and press your sides from one side and the other so that the exit is gathered into the circle; and then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife making a slit of the width, and not be any larger than the wound made at the opening of the vein; and make the skin perfect as you go to the exit; and in several positions comes the exit from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	So take away all a piece of linen cloth between your sides at the back, and turn your hand from right to left as it is spread; and be careful not to disturb the slit, so that you do not go to all the fat up to the oil, that you do not burn it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if he does not come out in the beginning of the split, so that he splits it lightly a little as it appears; then extract him as we have said, then moisten drapes in water and put on his place, and pull from the bends.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who grind salt and put on it to corrupt this moisture that is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the apothecary's place that is hot, if the healer of plasters assuages as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the papers come out fur that nature, and are dried up, if they hurt the eyes, and cause of the destruction of the eyes; and is the healer according to four ways: either by fire cautery together, or by medicine water according to what it is before, or cautery paste, and is made either by incision and sewing, or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the scalp of the patient in your left hand, then take the paper of oil in your right hand; if it is smooth, it is good; if not, if you pour a needle on all the thread above; and be this delayer the margin of the paper or the hair grow delayer these hairs, and follow the thread up to all the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part of the edge the paper, edge the hairs, with all the cotton seed, from the great wound until the small one; then pull out the thread, and put away the paper a little piece of cotton and tapestry, and sign on the paper an image of an ear, as that of a myrtle leaf, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is designed for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is a lot of paper that must be done according to the paper that is softened; then cut out all the spatum in two lines that you have signed, and begin with great tears until small; and make one of the clefts near the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then pour on it in one of the two angles where there is it, then dry it all; then join the two lips to a seam of one needle to all the thin wool thread, and rinse the blood, and do away with the superfluity of threads over the two sorcils to nothing sticky if you see to do this; and if not, I won’t care, then leave the seam and the threads for three days or four; then heal the wound without a seam of drying and binding things, because the paper softens at the injury and its gathering together, but the seam is old (as the elderly say), and it is done without fear; and if in another way: and that you sign the paper with a figure that is the same as the fuel of the mirth, as we have told, to three onces according to the shape that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then take this one which stands at the top with equal smallness according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the tweezers, and this is not equal, then take an awl or there is a thread, and bottle it out of shape; and bottle another thread from a large wound, and the second thread from a small one, and assemble them equally between your fingers; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the leather where you have bitten, as we have told you, then sew the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and calm it with cerotine and similar soothing salves; and never happens that the hair of the paper is turned: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li Papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de loil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it hesitates, if the cope has a certain force, then treat it until it is well; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute un fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilement, et soit la longuece des fils une palme de lonc; puis ordenez en la chasse un autre fil de soie brièremement, et noe les chiers du fil; puis mette li malaide son chier sur ton sein; et soit delicez le soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtils et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajousté, et la fai percer dans la papiere hastement tant que tu l’attires dessus le poil naturel; puis estrai le poil jusqu’a tout la chasse en la papiere avec le poil naturel.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased, treat it and the hair does not come off with it, then take the chase from all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the oil; then if you take the chase and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed for II or III days, as long as the hair hardens in its place and the hair grows up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair with nature's Chevoulz, and carry it along with that which you leave, as long as they are stretched out and then let them down.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati", comes in the oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from sudden wound, or surgical cut, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of this work is that you shall open the wound, and loosen the lips of it, and put therewithin linen strips, and keep it there until it is healed; and it is not necessary that you use for its cure any thing which dries and constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but if you use softening things, such as fenugreek; and water or oil and flax seed are cooked, and an ointment is made from it, and you wrap a linen strip around it, and treat him with it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you shall take care that it does not become hardened again in form than before; and the remedies which we have said above are nothing except to treat this disease, so that it does not return again according to its form before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the horse that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident happens from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the path of the jab into the shoulder is that you squeeze a needle, so that it has two threads, and put it in the horse, and let it pierce all the way to the left arm until it reaches the shoulder, so that the thread comes out at two joints of the shoulder, then take the char up to all the needle, and the cap up to the wide spittle.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper over, and make two cuts where the edges are within the paper; and let the joints of the two cuts form the two angles of the incision that you have made, and let one angle be so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter I with a tail; then take off this char, according to the quantity that its sides are out of place, from that which follows the paper, then join the two cut pieces, and sew them together with another thread; then let the healing come about from those medicines that we have said, and from bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si le malade vient de fendure, ou de costure, ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fendure plate entre les poils des papieres, et suivant ce qui est ci-devant; puis dézone entre les deux lèvres d'une tente, comme je l'ai dit; et il faut faire l'ovraige selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les maîtres saiges apparilleront avec soin de tout leur pouvoir comment il faut faire revenir la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade aussi, suivant ce qui lui convient d'ovraige et d'instruments en plusieurs dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Et s'il y a une brûlure ou une blessure, ou un cautérium, il faut que tu fendes une fendure plate entre les poils des papieres, et suivant ce qui est ci-devant; puis dézone entre les deux lèvres d'une tente, comme je l'ai dit; et il faut faire l'ovraige selon la forme de la blessure, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les maîtres saiges apparilleront avec soin de tout leur pouvoir comment il faut faire revenir la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade aussi, suivant ce qui lui convient d'ovraige et d'instruments en plusieurs dispositions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this weld comes together in a certain way, that the paper above is welded with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is necessary that you should put the point of a scraper on the paper, and lift it up; and let it come into contact with the fine spittle, which is neither too sharp nor too trenchant, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp spittle burning the oil; and make your incision, from which you peel away that which is assembled, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and let all that is assembled be well cured, and never use in the salt water, but the soft water, and the ring; then place between the paper and oil a linement, and place on the oil wool, wet with urine; and after three days use the ring and things which are welded until it is well.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I teach you that the nail is in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles strong syrup, and another which is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture, which cannot be touched by iron and cannot be heated with pinches, so that both appearances begin to increase towards the great tears, and grow little by little until they blind all vision, all light, and all movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that the patient places his hand on the limb, then he cuts the nails; and you hold paper in your hand, then coil the nail with small twists, and lift it up; then take a needle, and there put I hair of horse, or of cow, or of ox, and twist it tight; and double the needle's point a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the way through the nail, and tie the thread to the nail, and cut off the remaining at the root where the nail meets the flesh, leaving behind only a small thread that comes out from under the skin, just as tears normally come; and never do this incision whole alone, and on the thread, as we have said before; then you burn off all the hair where it meets the nail, so that its shape is like this:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l'incision giete en l'oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc'a l'autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu'il i covient tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And make sure that the awl does not touch the raw flesh and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of tar into the wound, and a string made from litargy, and leave it until the next day; then cure whoever needs it until he is well.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And take the nail off very carefully, and if you see that it is not getting thinner at all, then hurry to pour a little oil of tar from your mouth into the wound, and a red string made from litargy and a string of tar and twine; stop the oil until the next day; then start again with this same remedy, as long as it is all bony.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no objection in the oil, as an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the abscess until it is healthy, then resume work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm makes a bad impression in the oil by great damage, then suspend it for an hour, and make a cup of it, and not all at once, so that tears do not come; then distil into the oil a red color that is made of limestone.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of flesh that grows on the apple
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	of men's hair that grows on the apple
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case, you must adapt the treatment to each individual's weak points of nature; and from accidental causes, from iron work; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that the member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Some are red vessels that run over the oil, and their work and afflation weaken the oil every time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	So it is necessary that you first look at him to see if his eyes are red or not, and if they are, and there is no other disease in them except the redness of the eyes; then this is what you do with a certain method: instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, then hold those vessels for a long time according to his wisdom, and make the eye vessels delicate in this way:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two degrees in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And let there be two degrees in one course according to this form: then turn those veines subtlety, and squeeze the blood hour after hour, until you see remove the veins of oil; and guard that you do not wound the oil with the points of the spatulas, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not harm more than those veines; and when you have done this, if distil into oil green and red to corrupt what is delayed from the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to squeeze everything in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of things that calm the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured from the abscess being hot, then continue according to this method that is before until it is healthy; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The Mirror has given these names to the fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said above, and it is not healed, then cut through the abscess, laying bare the bone, and drain off all the moisture, so that the bone can heal.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	When the bone is bare, and you will see corruption and blackness, then reshape it with all the tool that can be used; it is called "spiky head", and make it round again, and file it so as to smooth it out, just like in this present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the raw bone on its proper place, then turn it between your hands, and press it with your hand a little so that you can feel that corruption is gone; and smooth it out once again, and restore its place with dry medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the leg is broken and has healed, and the collar of the bow is also healed, and it remains so for forty days, and does not become infected or suppurate, then there is no other device but to bring the fistula to the navel according to this form: and that is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with harsh medicines, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron is at three angles, and the furrow be narrow until the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If the bone is broken and has healed, and the collar of the bow is also healed, and it remains so for forty days, and does not become infected or suppurate, then there is no other device but to bring the fistula to the navel according to this form: and that is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with harsh medicines, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron is at three angles, and the furrow be narrow until the top as you see here: then place the iron on the bone, and remove your hand from the oil pot, then turn everything back to dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the leg has healed and hardened, bring the matter to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the hair is opened all over the body, and it does not come to disturb the nose nor to thin out, if you keep the patient; then bandage, then put the suction cups so as not to hurt him, then put oil on the bandages made of linen and linen towels; and the way to do the towels is that you take enough linen towels, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity of hair that it needs; then strain the oil from above a hard bandage, and start again with the suction cups so as not to hurt him; then remove the suction cups and leave the oil strained day and night, and it becomes more malleable, if you see the oil repair, it is good; if not, you start again with the plasters and the bandages and the oil and the suction cups until he is cured.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a woven towel
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a woven towel ruptures, then it breaks, and comes apart like rice grains, so that you can see through it; therefore, if you cover it with a cloth, the repairs are such that you stick in an awl at the root of the part that is broken until it reaches the top, then you stick another awl where there is double thread from the armorer; and let the first awl be placed according to the disposition; then you take hold of the double thread and wrap one part of the cloth around it, and tie it well, then remove the awl and put on oil that is wet with unguent; and let it sit as the thread moves back and forth with the cloth, then treat the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and never do you restrict the wound by wrapping each part of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are long and even, if they prick through the fine straw which comes completely from the oil, and run the moisture of the albumen and dry up the hairs, and enter soon; then extract them until they are well.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bowels of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," comes only from the bowels that are assembled in oil, resembling water descending, and yet it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the outbreak is such that you sit the patient on II chairs arranged neatly and upright, then take the head between your hands on either side, and move it up as you see the bowl come up to your hairs; then let it fall, and do not let the light shine on it, and observe the patient's behavior so as it might be; and if it does not descend, know that it is water, and the descending of the bowl is not arranged as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are sitting the patient between your hands, then take the subtile spatumil and strike upon the horny membrane with it by means of the continuous connection with the horny membrane and the crown, until the bow is drawn; and when it has been so struck, if it has come loose, then pour into hot oil mixed with honey, or with fenugreek which has been boiled and honey, and then cure it with another medicine until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of needles in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands so that they are away from sunlight, and that you hold the oil firmly; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the patient's hand is left-handed, or in your left hand if it is right-handed; then put the point of the instrument at the crown by its thickness on one of the little slits in the horny membrane at the end of the smaller lacrimal duct, and then turn the instrument gently and see that "almagda" comes to the hollow thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of "almagda" be completely the same as the measure of the space from the plum-pit up to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in the paper because of the clarity of the horny membrane, and then put the instrument at the level where the aigue is, and then express one drop after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is now seated, then look at the patient before him and the instrument in his hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a short while, and then he rises again, puts the force on with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently extract the Almagest by turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little of the liquid in again, and take it out from that oil.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on both sides the oil of turpentine or another moist oil in oil rosin and in abundance of urine, and bind with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our kind, let us put on a little fire with an abundance of urine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the Almagest cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men whose hairs are too hard, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so then make the congiuntive simple, and don't take too much care in it, but do make it thin, then pour in the almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare the patient for bed coming, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and eat light meats, and don't move his head either to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his position until three days; then let him be undone in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put him back in a tie until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you do this, so that he does not get better quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	As the septem comes, let you remove the oil from the seventh day, and prepare it with water that softens the abscess; and when it is calm, if you remove the veil and place a kerchief on its face to cover any day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he left the house little by little, and turned into his bed; and know that no doctors should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in his country it happens sometimes that water is sucked up, but nevertheless I have never seen this happen in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the forms of the shapes of almagda, so that he who does not know them may see them; and let them be of pure air.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let there be three angles behind it of this middle subtility.
de la char sor le neis	of the chisel on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times do born or neis chaps ajosted diverse, of which there are none that seem scorpions by mouth of pize; and if there be such or he has char enchailed of fux color, and if he has char suff of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chaps who are suff, and not enchancred, it is necessary that you set the patient between your hands towards the sun; and operate on his nostrils, and pour the ointment on those chaps, and make them hard; because thou shalt be able to support it at the spatumile subtile got of a part, as long as you know that this char is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if you open it all with the sharp instruments lightly, so that nothing stays; and if he rises again or an abscess appears, if the wound heals and as it should; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize him until the pain is relieved and all the chaps are boned, then pour or neis easily and quickly or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the baby is sick and there is moisture in the nose, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture perforates as it should, know that there is no fracture in the bone above, for the instruments do not come to cut: therefore you must put a piece of linen thread about one finger in thickness, and tie it with your hands and leave some space between each knot or more or less; and put the baby's nose on the thread at its strength, and let it suck until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and feel one after the other as we do with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it so that you know the new has corrupted this char, then tie the boy, wash the blood, and wet the boy with Egyptian oil, and put him back in his place as before; make it so three or more days, so long as the oils corrupt all who are delayed from this char; and then put a cord around the neck some days until he is well, and if there is need for dried medicines, use them then; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines for the neck:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a cord, and conduct it also; and if you see, make a closed cord, and be the instrument plain to purge the head; and I always keep at the head for it to hold when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the horse's shoulder from the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease arises in the shoulder from the neck, which grows and becomes great, so that it is seen by sight; and for this you need to chop it at first, and then burn it all over, then put fire on it; and if you delay it too long until it is great, see if it is hard, of pale color, poor in feeling: do not touch it with iron because it is a hot pustule, for when you chop it once, much harm comes to the sick person; and the pustule is touched by dry touch, not by pale color, and you see that he can chop it all, so free the sick one and chop him off without fear, and cure the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck has been cut and cleaned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Saiches that when the solution of continuing comes to one of these ovrained cartilage, i profit little, were not in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Saiches that when the solution of continuing comes to one of these ovrained cartilage, i profit little, were not in some men. It is necessary therefore that as soon as one of them has been wounded, if you consider that the wound is fresh throughout all its length; and then insert two nails into one side, then heal it until it is healthy; and if those nails are removed on one side from each other, then you must scrape all its parts, while they are healing, then join again the two nails on one side, and press them together, and powder them with dragon's blood and incense broied; and put upon the powders a piece of plaster of fer or any other plaster then, and let it be until it falls off by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of suturing is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	A main in the mouth will come out hard, resembling grains of rice, small and large; then you must turn the lips and cut each one, and take hold of it with tweezers and handle it thus: then employ fire as described above, until the wound is dried out; and then leave it alone, and cure the wound of dry things until it has healed.
de la char des gencives	of the skin of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the gum skin will come out hard, which the old man called "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cope it at its root, and let it run blood or air; then put on the place vitriolic ash, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this gum returns after incision, and many times comes back, if you cope it again, and cauterize it: if it does not return again after cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments to cope.
des sordens	of orders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No orders are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, those that are ugly and rough; and no teeth are black and yellow and rotten, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so it is necessary that you sit the sick person between your hands, and his teeth be in your hand, and you remove the teeth or gums that appear, as long as there is nothing to delay; and in this way make black and green, and yellow and other taints, until they are all gone; and if one should be at the first shaving, it is good; if not, then begin again on the second day and third, until you have all removed them; and know that teeth need different shapes of tools to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the razor which you use to shave the gums has other shapes than those with which you remove them between the teeth; and these shapes should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary for you to treat the toothache with patience as much as possible, because it should not be done quickly; for this is a very high-quality substance until one has no excuse for not treating it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So when the patient is forced to pull out teeth, you must be certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the patient forces him to pull out teeth, and he thinks that the tooth is good, and makes him pull out the right tooth; but the pain does not go away for this reason, as we have already shown in these gentlemen; and when you are certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled, it is necessary that you scrape under the tooth with a sharp instrument very well so that the gum is completely removed from all sides; then he puts it on your two fingers or small pliers at one stroke and one stroke until it is well loosened, then he secures the pliers; and let the jaw of the sick man between your knees, and let him stay there firmly so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After taking out the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fly away, then take one of these instruments and put it gently into each side, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the root is pierced and bleeds, then you should fill it with gauze where it hurts; and if it is carefully held with tweezers so that it does not break when it is pulled out; and you should cut open the gums around the tooth to remove it.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you must take care not to break it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient with greater pain due to the root's evilness than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to do as the ignorant doctor does, who, because of his haste and boldness, breaks a tooth sometimes, and does not properly deal with that which we have described; but brings about a great disease for the roots because they delay, or because they break the tooth, as we often wanted; and when the root is drawn out, if you wash the place with wine or water or oil; and they run away without stopping until, as often happens, it is rubbed with vitriol; and if that does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of instruments, so that they mute the teeth first, are long points and large handles, so that they do not double up when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be large members so that they do not bend while pulling, and they should be well made of iron, and they should have teeth to hold them in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains moist while pulling, you must put cotton wet with oil on the place or rub it with butter every day.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	while the roots are soft, for then the pliers that are called 'algefri' [from Arabic meaning 'grinding'] seem like a toothpick; and they should be made inside as a file is made, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, you must cut off the whole tooth, and put in its place the instrument that is called  'althali' [from Arabic meaning 'file'], which is this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be big and strong so that he does not break, and the root jumps by this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the tools, from which the forms come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two sides, from which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front in the reasoning of the nails, and this instrument that seems a pair of large pliers, from which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be apart that he cannot break, and know that many tools of the nails are; and also other tools, which are not worth mentioning; and the master craftsmen subtlety try themselves by their own instruments, according to what they are with their work and the disease shows them, because there are several diseases where the old man doesn't teach you the instrument, but if he can't break the chariot or other bones, or he will ride on it, if he seeks the tools that suit him, I told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can hold it and remove; and then bring back its place with medicines suited to this, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural form of the jaw, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the root is inside after the tooth, and it is not in its proper place, and you cannot sew it or file it: then saw; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose form we have described, which resembles a small beak, and which is made of iron obtained at source:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits tight and tight by the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then file with a file such as this is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime that one makes needles; and in time the tooth pokes and pokes with the hand lightly, so that it does not move until it chies; then the plane at the end to all rasors, and its edge is too trenchant and it bleches the tongue, so it is necessary to grind the sharpener until it is even, so that it does not blech the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth moves out of place
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and the tooth moves out of place, either by percussion or by biting, and the patient cannot press on what he chews so that he does not chie, and you have cured them with restraining medicines, and this is no good; if one should restrain it with a gold thread, for the silver thread becomes green and pitting, but the gold thread never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain on one side, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then insert the chewing between the teeth, if there is one or more, until you have cured them thoroughly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start again the covering up to the part where you have started, and strain your hand gently and thoroughly so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that he cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the teeth of the jaw to a plier, and fasten them together, and put them between the healthy tooth and the tongue so that it does not cut the tongue; then leave them thus tight as long as possible, and if they slip, or the wire breaks, fasten it with another wire; then if it delays and serves in this way all its time, and that is the shape of the teeth and the appearance of the two healthy teeth and the two molars, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then if the tooth loosens, put it back in its place little by little, as we have said; and do not meddle with it unless one is wise and patient, and never make the shape of a tooth out of a piece of bone, and put it back in its place where it has come loose, and fasten it as we have said, and delay and serve it for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	by copper the tongue of the ring
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No version is given for this line.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood comes out, then put on the leach vitriol; and if it does not stop, then cauterize with the lentechin, which is good for that; then heal with other healing remedies until he is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see any red or black or hard color on him, so that the patient does not smell it or touch it, for that is leprosy; and if he declines to blotch, and there is moisture, then pour on the leach, and make a fine fent with a sharp blade, and deliver from one side and the other; and if he does not stop bleeding to your cut, put on the vitriol leach until it is stopped, and then go back to your cut as you please; then raise the leach of water and sea salt, and heal him with other healing remedies until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Of the throat abscesses which are called "godath", and they are properly called "amandres", and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they do not heal, be careful: if it is an abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either for fear of causing blood loss; but let it rest until it has calmed down, and then remove it, or it will break by itself; and if it is a pale color, and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it, but first check that the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in the sun, and let his teeth be in good order, and he opens his mouth and puts his tongue on all the instrument, so that this is the form; and it should be of silver or gold as thin as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And now press the tongue against all this instrument, and you will see the abscess; take the awl and put it into the amber, and bend it above your head more than you can; and do not tie anything with it, then take off the cover from the instrument, whereof this is the shape, which seems a sharp thing; and yet the heads are curved, and one side against another, and they are very acute, and are made of iron of one kind or another.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you take a pair of pliers, whereof this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let them be cut on one side and the other; and when you have capped one of the amber, cap the other according to this same way, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and cold and quickly, and if the blood comes out, gargarize the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate seeds, or oak apples, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then let him be cured as long as he is healthy; and never let others come into the throat except the two amandres, if they are cut in the same way as the two amandres.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was located in her throat, which is to say, a small abscess; and I had it closed very tightly all around the throat so that the woman could not breathe through the tube that was plugged, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that it had risen two rain-falls from the two openings where the mucus drained.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I quickly put some of it in the mouth, then it came out again, and then a big piece of bowel; then I put another piece in the other opening where the mucus drained, and squeezed the tongue; after that I put some of the stuff in the abscess, and drank some water, and continued to drink and eat, and did not stop cutting at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess started to close up again, and filled the space that I had made empty, until it became very big; so I took it out and cauterized it inside the throat: it stopped growing; and me being gone from those parts, God dealt with it after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the tear comes out of the eye, and it is escaped and distant, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is big and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the cheek abscess is relieved, and it is thin, then you should cut it; and that which is round and gathered together and is not distant; and it is bloody or yellow-colored or black, then you should avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the eye disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I said, of its blushing and distance, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then put the awl into the eye, and rotate it, and cut it with two instruments that I said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond natural term; because if you cover more, it will hurt the throat and speech; and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two testicles, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about covering; then you must use fire cautery on the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient puts his head in your lap, and then he presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and mix it with sharp water so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and by using this instrument's shape, thus is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put a hair on the head of one patient, as if it were a pin; and then apply the medicine to the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and mix it with sharp water so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and by using this instrument's shape, thus is its form: And let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, if it does not go down to the throat and cause a sore; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the vein, half the quantity of an hour, until you see it turn black and the medicine's effects are gone; and if you need to reapply, do so, and after four or five times, let it dry, and wash it afterwards with cold water, and treat with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than the incision, save for cauterization. If it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamus and ysop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all together in a pot or some of them in I can, and I mix it easily, and let it boil; and the pot should be well covered with earth, and I put the instrument over it according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be made of silver or gold, and one of the shoulders is squeezed in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises through the tube to the heart, as long as the heart is weakened; after that, it is started again often, until the heart is dry, and you must not make this at the beginning of the appearance of a cold lump, for many things happen with it; and do not make this except at the decline of a cold lump.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Et s'il n'y a pas de cautère de feu, prenez une lame de rasoir et mettez-la dans la bouche du patient sur la gencive supérieure, de sorte que la bouche ne soit pas trop chaude; car la lame de rasoir ne fait pas de vapeur brûlante dans la bouche, et c'est un bon remède dans l'ensemble pour guérir.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Maintes fois s'enflamme la gorge os ou épine de poisson, ou aucune chose; donc il convient que tu tires ce que tu peux voir, et presse la langue au soleil sur tout l'instrument, de sorte que tu puisses voir la chose; et ce que tu ne parviens pas à tirer et qui est replié en la gorge, il convient que tu le fasses vomir de telle manière que la nourriture soit cuite dans l'estomac; peut-être que, si cela vomit, le patient engloutira une éponge, ou un morceau de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou du pain sec écrasé; et tu l'attacherais à l'éponge, puis la boirait; et quand elle arrivera au leu, s'il s'y est installé, alors tu tirerais fort; et si elle ne vient pas fort de ce que nous avons dit, il convient que tu utilises l'instrument de plongée selon cette forme:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.
de la sansue de la gorge	and let the instrument hang from the chin so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the chin; and guard against touching the epiglottis, for it to come loose, or to butt the bone; and rather let the patient hold the instrument, lest he move it or anything else; if the bottle is swallowed, or he pulls it back out of the instrument evenly, as far as it goes.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Let there be no medicine of the sansue, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look at the throat of the sick person towards the sun, because you press the language to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, if it is thin like water, or has tiny claws that grasp hold of him.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if he does not respond, take a strong dog, and pour the dog's saliva into the mouth of the sick person, then pour or spray the dog's saliva often with heat and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the disease of water is in him every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full pitcher of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, and move it with his hand often; and if soon as the blood feels the water, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then suffocate the sick person with the ashes of the plant that I mentioned in the ventilation of the room; do this many times, for it will soon throw up.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument, as one treats the pus, seems to me if one can see it, like a pair of pliers that can enter the throat; and has the appearance of a file, and has sharpness; so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The text describes two types of abscesses: those that result from perforation and those that result from incision. The former are caused by moisture and the latter are caused by a lack thereof.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second type are due to the joints or places where they are located.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess at the top is different from that at the base, and the abscess in the shank is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, until the bow breaks according to its course; and if there are some that it is necessary to pierce when they are acute, and do not break according to their course, as in the case of an abscess in a luxurious joint.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from the joints, and are left as they are inside, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or the abscess is removed from the main limb, and if you delay the piercing as long as it is dead, so it will harm the main limb; or if it is removed from its foundation, so let it be pierced in such a way that it does not die completely, so that it may become dry inside, and come to a fistula; and cannot heal very well.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for piercing the abscess that is dead according to completion, and that is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is right that you make the piercing as much as possible near the abscess, and where it opens; and let the piercing be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal, there is no blistering.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who are bleeding, by this limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the middle of the flesh, if they burst so that you leave the piercing until it is completely digested, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, if you delay the course of the venime from it, and there is much pus; and perhaps harden the lips and his deep wounds.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you should bring small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such that they are covered with a patch, and sealed; when they have become as soft as clothes, and are softened, so do you do as you do to boils: and if they are such that they are split in three directions, and if they are such that they are cut like oak leaves, as if they were abscesses of the neck; and if they are such that they are cut into a circle, and other shapes and apparently cut.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechef; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For if the arrow's flight suddenly jumps out, perhaps the patient will die, and you won't notice.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if the patient's wound suddenly bleeds profusely, perhaps he will die, and you won't notice. So use this ointment with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wash it with water until it is clean; and if there is a large abscess and many pustules, let each one have a patch of flax or old cotton; and if the abscess has broken open and some of the flesh has been removed, then let him fill it with wet flax or linen rags free from moisture, and tie it on until the third day; then cut off the bandage and apply ointment as long as he is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the pain comes to your work, if you bring cold water and easily, and damp the blanket, and put it on the place that hurts many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain persists, if you bring warm water and easily, and damp the blankets, and put them on the place that hurts many times. If the pain does not go away, if you give yourself treatment and the powders that I have said to do with your hands in this book, and if it is a case of poison, and the apostemes [abscesses] are nervous, know that you must put on blankets and draperies soaked in wine and oil; and if it is an infection, and the limbs are swollen, know that you must soak the draperies in water and oil, or in cold wine, for three days, as we have said; and then clean the abscesses and dry them and treat them, as it should be, until they are healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what I know universally in the treatment of abscesses: or you told me how one should go about before treating abscesses, and here is the ointment.
des soros	wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	And these wounds come little abscesses, and are handled by us so that they are like the sinews of a rope, and many have their resemblances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are fatty ones and such where there is moisture as well as birds; and some are so hard and bony that the artery does not do contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the spine so is that you experience all the instrument called "intramissoire", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if it flows from above the long way.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, if it leaves the hair that contains that moisture, for it comes back again when one lets nothing; and then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if there is any; or water and saliva, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed, cure them.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And since we begin to talk about cotton, just as before, on the second day and third, until you know for sure that it does not stay in place overnight; then heal the wound with ointment suitable for the case, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess remains hard, since it is shaped like this, then cut it; and pour your vinegar, and the scar all over, and put all your care into draining the crotch where it is; and if the artery hurts you, do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is bony, and for the scalf and cure it as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the bony abscess and the moist one; for they are light in blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or scars don't have moisture in them, and some of the ones I mentioned were caused by an old woman's touch; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, sharp, and white, and couldn't break it; and had we cut any of them, we would have made a wound like one caused by a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come out at the top, those who come out at the tips of the children and the roots of the ears, it should be so all the time as much as possible keep them open, to allow the bowels to move; and treat them as it should.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there is an abscess at the throat, and they come together, and they hurt, and never go to another place or cross, and they rot, and stick to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, as the lump and the abscess at the top, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see of good disposition in the chest, and the color of the flesh is like that of the body, and does not move from any part and is not deep; it is convenient that you cut it from above, and scorch each part, and the two lips of the chest to one side, if you need to do so, as we have said in the abscess at the top; and cut little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and do not let your knife escape, and do not go too far ahead, that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open the vein or the artery and it does not let you operate, then put vitriolic acid on it or some powders that stop the blood, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are quietened and the wound is softened, and begin to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has scarred, if you return to your work, until you have finished it; then examine your index finger for any small ulcers, and if there are any, pick them and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a lot of blood at the root of the abscess, it only comes when you cut the abscess at its root, but leave it hanging by a strong double thread, and let it hang without hurting; then wrap the wound with a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then clean it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have taken all the plague, it is necessary that you join the two lips of the wound together, and sew them up; so that there may be no delay because of the abundance of the plague.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	If it is necessary for you to copes with the root of it, and draw it out hard, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have an abundance, pierce them so that they die; and pierce them in the same way as we said before, taking care of it, then clean them with ointment and similar things so that those who are delayed by corruption are corrupted; and when the wound is well washed, apply ointment to cure with care.
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	the ancient ones spoke about the lengthening of the neck; but I never saw it done in our land, and it is the scriptural word from their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	A those who have a squint, it is fitting that the fold of the throat which is called the "epiglottis" be removed; and no help be sought from this, for all the veins and the pulse of the sick person are at those who have an abscess warm in the mouth or in the throat or in II Mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the throes of death, it is fitting that we cover the epiglottis to prevent the strangles which come from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is fitting, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it with three circles or four small cuts from the edge, between two circles or by the amount of the cut in the cartilage; and if they are suitable for cutting the epiglottis so that there is no need for a blade, and the vessel is long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Et si le maître est effrayé, qu'il étende la peau du cou à tout l'ongle, puis fente la chair tant qu'elle arrive à la mâchoire; et écartez les vaisseaux sanguins, si tu ne vois aucune chose, et puis appliquez le sirop, comme nous l'avons dit; et il est démontré par la section du flux de la mâchoire qui saute loin par l'espace qui est rompu, et par l'absence de voix; et laisse la plaie ouverte une pièce.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hour has passed when one doubts strangulation, join the two lips of the wound together, and let the flesh all around feel the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat, until it is well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says: 'Do not do this before the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect leaves.'
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then put on the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and so he is saved from death; and for this reason the elder commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then he commands to stitch the wound up and cure, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut some of her chin; and I was called to cure her, and I found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had flowed from it, and I saw that she had not cut a vein or an artery; the blood had flowed out through the wound in her throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was well; and there came to the damsel nothing but that she became red in the face, and returned after to her condition; for I said to myself that in the sewing of the epiglottis I had no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Hernias of the throat are called "gastric hernias," and they are large hernias in color like a jacket, and most often occur in women; and they are according to two manners: innate, and accidental; or innate has no mechanism.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is according to two manners, so that one is similar to a fat person, and another manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us through the artery; and there is fear, and it cannot be operated on at all, except in the one that is small, and test and seek everywhere: if you find it as I know a fat person, and it cannot be cut at all, if it is cut like this, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to approach this problem, which I will now describe in full; and it is necessary that I should state the entire difference between our approaches and the outcome.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is sharp and feverish until the boils have passed and are completed; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the lou our fever and pain are gone, and we become healthy, which is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a seed, and grows heavy; and they are according to their appearances, or green, or moist, and very much in color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the patient, it is necessary that you first test and question all the instruments called 'entromissoire', according to what their form will be or the paste that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way of the investigation of abscesses is that you squeeze or more moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has entered, then it is according to the greatness of the abscess; then extract the intruder, and take care in this that he do not jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running water is recent, that it be colored, as I said about the other abscesses; and if after the intruder comes moist, know that it is grease, so do in a cross, and take it with tongs, and peel it lightly from each side and guard the wool where it lies so you bring it healthy with the knot; and if you cannot bring it healthy, take it by pieces so that nothing stays.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it does not linger, we return to us many times; and if it lingers a little, and does not grieve him, employ the wound with some corrosive powder water, and extract the wound, and put on things soothing aposteme warm, and cure with other cures as long as he is healthy; and if we are great, so cut the II lips of the wound, and cure who causes it to burn.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it is opposite to you or another, do not hurry and employ the place of vitriol broil, and let it rest II days or III, as long as the wound corrupts, and rest the ebullition of blood; then return to cop who is delayed from the knot.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of three ways: great and small and little; and if there are III quarters that are called "albaret", and I that is called "breb", and there are also of III ways: great, small, and little, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; and also as the needles with which one does sorcery, and they are of gold, or of yellow brass, or of iron, or of silver, and move those who are yellow, and are more tried by black lead to encircle the corbances of fistula; and they are of III ways: great, small, and little, according to the quantity of the largeness of the apertures.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	Les formes des oncynes sont de moute de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moins, et petis; et s'il y a des oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manières aussi; et si à des oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont aussi de III manières; et si à des oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manières; et tout cist sont nécessaires en lor lieu.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The shapes of scabies are of various appearances, just as you see here: large, small, and medium-sized. If there are scabies that have II corbeaux (curved parts) in III ways; and if there are scabies that have III corbeaux, and are also in III ways; and if there are scabies that have II corbeaux, and scabies with only one corbeau, and are also in III ways; and all of these are necessary in their places. The head of such things is sharp, and of such I have who do not cut except on one side, from which we scrape the flesh so that they do not hurt when cutting a vein or a nerve; and the intermediate ones are inserted in many, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of III kinds: large, small, and medium-sized, just as you see; and one does not use anything else but in their places charnel, as legs, arms, mamelles, and angles, and in similar places; and never does one make another instrument small, resembling scabs of fists, according to this form, from which one heals without pain:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back in its place that heals with a compress of veins, and arteries, and never be according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No man inflates the breasts of some men when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like women's breasts; and they become ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary according to this form of the line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then peel the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with oil, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is well; and if it is not well, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the shedding of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton wicks soaked in a corrosive oil; and leave it until it drains the remaining blood and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the tendons of the leg
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	the tendons that come from the heels are treated as hard scars or if there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b. up to line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bow that is in the tendon has healed, then bandage the wound with cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as needed until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the tendon resembles a scar of a wart, then cut it as we have said in the cutting of warts, and if the wound opens again, apply fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is severed and the skin above it is tightened, then many aphmoments occur, and all that comes out is blood and an abscess; and if you recognize it for an artery, the aphmoment is long; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel extraction; and if it is for a vein, it is difficult to detect; and it is foolish to bandage this aphmoment, and most of all when it is dislocated at the heels, and at the ankles, and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to avoid the use of iron treatment, and in the case of the chief it is also necessary to avoid it, and in that of swelling of the artery, cut through the skin from above; then operate on the waist as one does, and carefully remove the nerves from the strands, until it is uncovered; then pierce it with a needle, and make it go through to the other side, and draw out the artery with two threads according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then stop the place where the thread is between the two knots of an introducer as long as there is no tension there and the apotheosis is removed; then apply the treatment, as I told you, until the tie chokes; then treat it with ointment coming before that one, until it is healed; and if the apotheosis is for the waist, so that you hold what you can of the apotheosis to your hand, then pierce the needle through the place where you hold it in your hand, and make it go through, and I have it with two threads, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the apotheosis, as I told you, or the thread of one of the two parts to the two apotheoses of the thread; and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, if it is rebought another needle to all the thread desoz all the apotheosis at the incision of the first needle, and draw the threads in four threads; then cut off the apotheosis until the superfluity comes out, then cut off the superfluity of the cure and leave what is tied; then put on a wet curtain soaked in wine and oil, and apply to it cures of tent and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, they come from the artery and the vein, they come from the nerves when they are hurt or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often to the shoulders and arms and all their joints, and their color seems like the color of the flesh, and they are in many dispositions without pain; and when it is stretched out, if the patient feels pain, and it is not firm all over, but mutates well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and that which is at the shoulder or forehead, makes the skin crack.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the Aposteme is small, if it has a nail, and copes at its root; and if it is large, if it hangs from the neck, and scorches, then break the bone and join together the wound with sutures, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	The large bellies hanging down.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Once there came to the belly and nowhere else the yule, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance, and is the subtle root, and the large nodules; and there are small and large ones; and I saw a man who had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were torn, and they ran together moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them, and in one there were XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI Z., and the heads of the shoulder when cut so that you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the armpit is white and moist and has a subtle root; if you chop it with a large spatula, and let it be present for you to cauterize with fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that has become infected, and I will come to the treatment of chancres hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is well-healed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the wound is due to a cauterized sore or a cut from a knife, and it is on the abdomen and there are some boils, just as in other ruptures, or blood that comes from veins or arteries according to what is before, or wound; and if it is by the cut of the sore and by the issue of the boil, then is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the flesh, and is a light thing without pain, and opens with various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it to its two sides so that it returns, and then comes back again, and perhaps it is stuck, and enlarges much at the entrance of the lavatory and from great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et s'il est à cause d'humidité, c'est une chose légère, et il suffit de le presser bien fort entre tes mains, sans le contraindre; et s'il est à cause de sang, alors l'apothème grossier et dur doit être frotté selon une quantité; et s'il est à cause d'un vent, alors il est doux au toucher, et l'ouvrage est tel que tu regardes l'apparence, c'est-à-dire pour le sang de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou du vent.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	And if it is because of moisture, that is a light thing, and it is enough to press it well between your hands, without constraint; and if it is because of blood, then the gross and hard apothecary must be rubbed according to a quantity; and if it is because of wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look at the appearance, namely for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or of the wind.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said before, or chapitre with the apothecary of the abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to dye his hair, and lie down completely flat, then sign all around the bowel; then command him to go slowly between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed all around the spatulum, then attach half of the appendix at the top of all the great hook; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a piece of strong silk rope, and let it hang in place; then operate on half of the appendix extended over the rope, and place your thumb index there, and feel the intestine; if you find it attached to the rope, let it go, and push the intestine towards the back of the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, take it with the hook, and cut off the excess; and if the artery opposes or the vein, go softly around, then return to your work and take two needles, and push two fibers through the thread, and push the needles around what you have made a hole; then pull half of the appendix in four places over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rot and putrefies, and cut off the dead tissue by itself; or when it is thin and rotten, then treat it as necessary, and cut off the appendix as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, and cure the place from what it needs, and solder the place.
dou chancre	Dou Chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Dou Chancre: We have spoken in the division about the appearance of chancres and how they should be treated with medicines, and how to avoid the cure with iron; and we state that the chafe is caused by marris, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and the ancient one says that when chafes are in their place where they can be cut as a chafe that is in mameles, and in the cixe, and in similar places, it must all be cut when it is in an incipient state; and when it is large and old, it should only be approached by you, for I have never found one that was cured; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the incisions, when they are in their place where they can be cut as we have said, is that you purge twice the disease of black colic; then make the patient well before making the incision, then dip your knives or chaffs, and the bone from all parts, leaving nothing; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the place with your hand or anything, and if it runs against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood stops; then cure him with other cures until he is well.
de ydropisie	of hydropisis
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	of hydropisis
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And be cut in two parts. A point, and whatsoever it may be, let not the knife come so deep as to hurt anything; then look if the hydropisis is in towards the intestines: then let you make a slit on the left side of the navel III parts; and if it is for the liver, then let your slit be on the right side of the navel III parts; and if it is for the bile, then let it be on the left side, and let the patient lie upon the slit that the overflows do not run to that feeble leech; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour out, and hold your hand at all the spittle between the skin and the leech also as when you are scraping off a piece of flesh of a quantity of an ungle or so long; then pierce the leech as much as the spittle comes to the leech's mouth, and this is the leech's hole for the water, then remove it, and pour out, and take this instrument, in which there is this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Et est semblant à une chaine d’argent subtil, et est d’airain ou d’archaut léger, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou coûtait d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés taillé si com une plume, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li écrivains taille la plume:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And is similar to an elegant silver chain, and is of brass or light copper, and has in the part of the nose a small hole; and where it costs on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and is the chien tailled so as a plume, and this is the form of the incision which the scribes cut the plume: at the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it pours now on the instrument; empty then half or a third, because if you pour more than what is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he may turn away from death; but in empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient mean, and his pulses; then try the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now for the measure which stops the hole that is on the leech, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this way; then restart the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try with a little quantity of water; do not repeat this any day, and keep yourself from fooling around as long as it does not stop but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the disease, and you leave a lot of water, so that the cure of the burial or sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and darkening from drinking; and the cure of drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterizing on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	The stopping of the flow of blood from the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born with a small foreskin, or if the foreskin is small, it is not in its right place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary that he does not pierce all the small and subtle skin according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put the foreskin on a piece of leather, and fasten it and keep it there for three days or four, and when he has to urinate, if the foreskin does not come off, let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is not covered by the skin.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The wound is sore, if it has medicine poured on it, if as we have said, if it broadens out.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hernia in its proper place are bleached, for no man is born with a hernia at the root of his penis, because he cannot pee unless he raises his penis; and he cannot urinate due to the matter not reaching the bladder, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The way to operate is such that the patient lies down on his back, so that the root of the penis and the scrotum are as flat as a feather; then the hernia will pop out, as it should; and be careful not to tear the skin which covers the hernia, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis pustules
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times there comes a painful swelling in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are evil and non-evil ones; so that you should squeeze them with fine oil, and cut and clean them all, then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on it; then cure with the diafinicon until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, of a purplish color and putrid, you must apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the swelling is in the penis, and there is some inside the skin and some outside, then first take out the swelling that is inside; and when it is sewed up, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the head of the penis is not firmly attached, it will be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into his penis and scrotum; so that you must chop off everything that is black and corrupted, then put honey and flour paste on it made from pomegranate rinds and dates, and treat it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood flow begins, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the blood flow begins, then administer the lunar cautery according to these two preparations: first, at the onset of bleeding, and second, in corruption; and if the foreskin is corrupt and retracted, then it is necessary that you either drive or conduct a cord of leather into the foreskin, and pee on the patient; and since the hair has grown at the root of the foreskin, where there is a wound or abscess, it is therefore necessary that you scrape with a knife, as much as the bonds are loosened, and freed from the foreskin from all sides; and if this is a difficult matter to speak of, it is necessary that you scrape it with a scalpel on the scalp and skin. Then separate them very well, and put a thin linen cloth wetted with cold water, so that it does not grow again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuance of the wound if it is like other wounds; yet when we do this work by our will and mainly on children, it must be done with more care and less heaviness for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old men did not say anything about circumcisin
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the worthy men who made circumcision under the belly, and to all a new trickle; and that is because there are two holes, and by chance if one copes on this one and delays that one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it comes again covered up, and the pain is doubled, and the washing from the belly is not sure at the point of the limb; and the washing of the nail by chance escapes the knife, and completes the work, and many times are born so that there is no need for washing and I wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	By mouth washing which is done to all the links of string I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the links are cut exactly as they are sewn.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you squeeze your hand, if you cut it evenly across I all the links; but that the string be well twisted around the leather; and that the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not force the string except to tie it tightly around the shaft so much, and then let it rest in all ways that you can; then let it rest between your hands straight, and retie the forces between your hands or your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then bottle your hand on the shaft and blow or curl, and twist it up high as much as the shaft's head is in; then clean it well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the first knot with a double thread, then tie it off I to I link; and hold it for II days by the second knot at the pouchet and the little finger, and rub it between the II links, then let the blood flow freely, because that is the bleeding; and put powder on top of the powder I drape with a piece of dried egg yolk mixed with rose water and good oil and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and the cure of another cure as long as he is well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the muscles for cleansing is such: the two shoulders should be soft and pliable, and the shoulders themselves should also be long and equal.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing is when the cur is escaping from the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your finger so that the edges form an abscess, and equalize it, and if you cannot hold it with your fingers, then put it in a clamp, and then make it equal.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it lasts three days and the part that is sore has swelled, if you leave the abscess to dry up gently and scald it slightly; if you can move it as you wish, and keep away from the part of the pole, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the powder of things that are a sore powder, which we have said in the treatment of powders, and if the cure goes beyond measure, and it goes up, it will not harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	holding back of urine is caused by stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or charnel, or similar things which we have said in the division; and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is held back by the stone which is at the base or neck of the bladder, so that the patient is forced to bend on his knees; and let them put the needle on the back part of the spine, and spread out the abdomen from above the back, and restrain the patient so that he can lie down as much as he can; and then it is necessary to bring the base of the bladder to expression over the stone by means of the instrument which is called a "syringe", whose form is this: and let it be of fine lightweight silver, like the feathers of a owl; and let the needle be about a palm long and half wide, and make it very fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take I thread in double, and tie at the chief a bit of wool or of cotton, and bottle the chief with the thread into the syringe; and cut off the superfluity of the wool and the bottle to the chief of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or of butter and of albescents, and make sit the sick one on I seat, and raise up the bladder and the penis with wet oil and of olive oil and of water; then put legierly the syringe in the penis, as far as it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over against the boude; then bottle the syringe before jusc’to the bladder, and make go the urine come jusc’to the empty thing, and this is not done selonc this order but that for which that you conduct or she went est tors; then are the thread to all the wool poc and poc, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out, and make run the urine; and begin again the syringe as long as the bladder be empty, and is aligiez the sick one.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or sores come to the bladder, or when it is inflamed, and you see there distilled water and medicine, if done with all the instrument that is called "klepsydra", and this is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three openings: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see it; and let the hair grow by which the medicine drops is such that it stops well the thread without addition, so that it can be drawn out the moisture, and poured when necessary; and when you see your medicines move in the bladder, put the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and pour while pushing forward; if you pour the moisture into the catheter, and let it come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the shape of the subtle clistere with which one chlorises the bladder: this is it:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the division of stones and their extraction together with medicines; and we have also said that there is a difference between stone in the kidneys and all other signs, and as to stone, one must operate by size; and as to the bladder and penis, I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder like water in its subtility; and I cut it open, and wash the patient's penis, and then massage it many times, and then re-bandage it; and it is light to heal in children until they are four years old, and very painful in elderly men, and intermediate in those between childhood and old age; and the cure is lighter with those who have large stones than with those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it is not often necessary to seek treatment with stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet and move them to the left and right so that the stone comes out completely from the bladder, and never goes up; then make him sit with his legs spread wide and his hands on his thighs, so that the bladder hangs down; then feel and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry to cut over it with a sharp knife.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not come out at the touch from all sides, then moisten your little finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is old, or cut off your two fingers, if the patient is young and complete; and push it down, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it with your two fingers, press it against the neck of the bladder; then press from above with your two fingers, and force it out at the place where you feel it.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to squeeze the bladder in his hand, and he commands that he extends to his right hand the sacs on top, and with his left hand oste the leather that is dislodged between the sacs where you make the waist; then I pour the sputum copping, of which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And open between what is between the sacs and the foundation, not in the middle but at the cost of the left hip; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two should be joined to the foundation, and let the waist be drawn across so that it is wide at the bottom and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps the pressure should be there where the foundation is, so that it does not work; and you know that there is a piece of stone or angles, and edges: this is painful to push out; and if there is a part that is under, resembling a glans, and round, whose output is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A cell where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not bend, so that you extract it on pincers which are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you pour oil of olive with a subtle corbelled instrument at the head; and if you cannot fix it so, so large the little hole, and if it is rough, so extract the vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first extract the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then grind strongly, and the smaller ones after, if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, so that it is convenient to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things for the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out soon because his veins cannot hold it; but nevertheless you push to extract, or to shred with pincers, until you extract it in pieces; and when you have accomplished your task, bind up the wound with a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then remove the patient's bond by his neck, and do not release the ligature until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if the joint rises well up in oil and water, then cure with dry ointment and basilic ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come up into the wound and corrosion, and congeals of blood in the bladder, and is held back by urine, which is conveyed in a certain way that it does not flow with the urine: then you should put on the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it out; then lift the wound with water and oil and tar, and help it in all ways that you know how to do, until it is healed; and it is convenient that all the times that you cure it, you tie the two legs, and join the medicines to the joint.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is located at the tip of the penis, and inserted into it, and urine cannot come out; if you cure it in this way that I have said, that you cut it many times, then you are excused from cutting because of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have tried this on.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron before forging it according to this form and make it three-angled in one piece:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and polish the end of the iron bar against a stone, so that it cannot come out at the base; then dip the bar slightly into the file, until it comes to the stone; and turn the bar back and forth in your hand slightly, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then soon after, the urine will come; then press your hand against what is delayed in the stone that is inside the bar.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and jumps with the urine and is healed by the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason that harms it, then polish the bar against a stone and another on top of it, then extract it forcefully, and take out the line, and clear the frozen blood from the wound; and heal it until it is well.
de la piere des femmes	from the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is certain that the woman's stone has been lodged in women, and if it has not happened once, this great cure is attacked by three things: first, that the woman may be a virgin; and secondly, that we cannot find a woman well informed who does not cover herself in public places, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that we cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more perfectly made than that of the man, so that it is necessary to make a more profound incision, and there is much fear; and if you need to know one, you must find a well-informed midwife, and few do; and if you can't find one, don't look for a married one either; but get a young woman who knows some part of the art, and order her to do what you command in the examination of the stone; and see very well whether she is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to put out her right foot or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she should bind her right hand to her lower abdomen, and wants and urges her left hand on the bladder form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S'elle la trueve, si covient qu'elle la déplace lentement depuis l'entrée de la vessie jusqu'à la racine de la cuisse, puis coupe sur la pierre dans la racine de la cuisse près du milieu, là où il est mouillé et sent la pierre dans cette partie; et ne déplace pas ses deux côtés au-dessus de la pierre ou à la racine, et soit son taille petit au premier; puis boutte le rait en la taille, si tu sens la pierre tellement brûlante contre la plaie jusqu'à ce que la pierre puisse sortir, et saches que plusieurs manières de pierres existent: c'est savoir, petites et grandes, acérées et rugueuses, longues et rondes, et qui ont des rainures.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If it bleeds, then know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it stops, then reset with vitriolic broiet, and hold it for an hour until the stop is stained; then return to your work, as long as the stone has come out, and have aids in your work by the means I told you about extraction of stones from men to help you; and if it stops, and it is an artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the spot and drain it with cotton and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it, except that it might die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fever has abated, and the person is perspiring, return to your treatment, as long as the stone remains far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carneous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The water of ramie is not other than the assembly of moisture or white syrup which is in contact with the kerite contained in the shell; and it is called "syrup", and it does not come out properly from the shell of the kerite, if one thinks that it is another shell; and this skin of the kerite between the white syrup which we have mentioned; and that does not come to a poc non.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramie is so weak that it comes out towards the kerite, and that material is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And it does not come from impact on the kerite, and this moisture has many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and that happens more; and these are the signs of distinguishing this assembly, because if it is what we have said, white syrup, then it is the reons of the apostemes, a long time like the figure of an ear, and does not close the kerite, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the linen itself, then the abscesses are accompanied by a part of the egg white, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the yolk, then one feels heat well. So when you want to know the color of the moisture, then try all the scrotum, since its shape is as follows.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, and what comes after the scrotum, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be made healthy according to his strength and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and puts many blankets over him; then he sits on his left side, and commands the attendant to sit on his right, and stretches the rod between the two ribs at the base of the testicles; then take the leathern thong, and tie it among them until the end of the poke, and let it hang down; and make the incision straight up to the white skin, and slightly scrape off the skin, according to one's skill; then pierce the white skin with water at a wide place, and drain all the water out, and then put your thumbs, and raise the skin up front; and do not touch the base of the testicles, but only the skin itself; cut it all off in one piece or separately according to need, so that you do not cut into the testicles, if you do not cut it well; and if the egg should jump out at your work, take it back to its place when you have finished the work of the skin; then join together the two testicle-hooks with a stitch, then care for it as you do for the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg has been corrupted by some other disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of the decay of blood; then take care to put the egg into all the suspender, and extract it, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then take care to cut the other part as you did the first evenly, and wash the blood, and put on another wet with oil; and put away another wool wet with wine and oil, and put on the two eggs, and put over double sheets, and tie it all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	And take two sheets, and fill them with wool of the color of the egg, according to this shape and are assembled by sewing into the throat of the breeches; and one of the shoulders is pressed against the foundation until it reaches the back, and the other at the part of the peg; and the other two heads are on the two angles, and all is assembled in the loop of the breeches; and there is no medicine for this ramice of cautery but in the iron size, and that you press I the sutil cautery, and take off the leather of the eggs, and heat it as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the egg is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white syfac once, and scorch it with that subtle cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have finished; and keep the fire from touching the egg; and know that this work is safer; and be careful about the loss of blood, and move quickly in cutting the testicles; and if anything contrary to it, or an abscess or a loss of blood or something else, then treat what contrary to it, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then give him a piercing, as I have said, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have said that the water is coming out, then place the patient on a high seat; because the abscess is in the region of the testicles to all the sputum, and make the piercing long at the back of the neck; and make the punctures large so that all the blood runs out; then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let it run out the remaining blood, then treat as long as the wound heals; and if the white cloth does not allow the blood to come out into the mouth of the wound, then you should put a feather or the instrument with which one draws the blood from the hydropses, so that the form is as before; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the blood returns, and is joined after VI months or so, and when it is joined as before, then let the patient go his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testes
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I understand that in this part of the text there are many interpretations and concerns, so I believe that it is best to let it be; and I will tell you about the work and appearance of the testes.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many testes come from the body, and most often from the testicles; and this happens for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	That is to say, by the sour and bitter excess of heat in the testes, which is spread to the testicles, or from impact; and the color of the testes depends on the color of the body; it does not cause pain, and the appearance is bad; and sometimes there are swollen, painful, red testes, and no blood comes from the arteries, or from the swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an artery, if you feel the testes with your fingers, then only touch them.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l'expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fuer du blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocation of the shoulder is caused by moisture, and it cannot be set in place; the affected limb becomes misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient. To treat this, one must first reset the dislocation, then apply heat and massage the area to promote healing. If the dislocation is stuck in a certain position, one should try to free it gently, as attempting to set it too forcefully could cause further damage.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the dislocation is located behind the shoulder, one should carefully attempt to set it in place and then remove the dislocated head gently, as described earlier.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are finished, apply the wound with wool soaked in oil and wine, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is one of the first descriptions of an abscess, wrapped in a wrap resembling a burlion, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans much when he goes; and the cure for this disease is so afraid as it was before, and we will tell you the treatment of it, according to what the old did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit down on an easy seat, then dip the suspender of the testicles in water at both ends, to all the vessel which are next to the penis, and dip them masterly, and spread them straight; then take a knife with a sharp edge in the middle of it, so that it goes through both ends, as we have said before in the extraction of the arteries that are in temples; then he puts a needle there where the thread is, and ties it to the first place where the vein has come, and ties it quickly to the other end; then he draws them up right, according to the length of the body, and removes the corruption; then heal the wound as you would do with others, so that no vessel cries out that they do not nourish one of the testicles; for by this there comes no harm, and all the vessels come into sight, so it is necessary to draw the testicles from all the vessels; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and can't help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Regarding the rupture of the syrup, or extension on the abdomen in the section of the anus, because of which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the loins; and this rupture is either of the syrup, or of the extension thereof, and these two ways are due to causes: either by percussion, or by leap, or by braying, or by a sudden effort caused by grief, and similar things; and the signs when it is of the extension of the syrup, if it is little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the anus is even until almost finished, so that the syrup presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the rupture of the syrup, that it causes a sudden painful start; and the anus is different in appearance, as if it were being pressed by skin; and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body's response to the release of the syrup.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the loops with the intestine, and is held back, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	For in these treatments of iron, for fear that it will stick.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron, for fear that it will stick. So order the patient that he keeps the intestine in his hand within the wound, if he can stand it; then cut off the hair with shears above and below the wound, and remove the skin from the hair, all around; then bottle the blood as far up as possible; then take two fingers of your right hand and put them under the skin of the navel, between the white skin which is over the hair, and between the second skin, and behind the navel, and between the second skin; and with your left hand put your index finger into the navel, and reach up to all the skin; and command the minister that he extends the navel, and loosen what is behind it; and feel with your two hands if there is any wrapped intestine or hard white skin, and if you do not find anything, then bottle it down; then take a needle which has X thick thread made of II threads, and bottle it in the back part of the skin, which is after the hair; then tie the thread, all around, so that no pieces of thread come out through the wound, and an abscess does not form; and fasten the threads tightly with two knots each, leaving a long tail of one knot; and wrap the thread around the navel, tying it into two knots, so that no strings come out through the wound, and an abscess does not form; and cut off the strings, leaving a long tail at the top; then apply wool dipped in oil to the wounds, and tie on the threads that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And in no way is the white blood cauterized as we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it seeps by itself; and if it delays in seeping, then rise it with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it seeps; and then heal the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnose
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone attempt to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old people said that it is made in this way as the thread that joins together the legs, slightly apart after the cutting on the shoulder lightly at first; then copes and heals the abscess of him who opera, as long as the threads seep; and cure it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes without rupture in the veins, if as we have said, and open the avenues; and do not let any of the intestines fall into the channels, and if some fall, it is little, and they are repaired every hour; and nevertheless, if he stays too long at this point, so believes the wound or syphac, as much as the intestines fall; and this happens because of the extension of the syphac that is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and the avenues are opened and enlarged; and the cure is by cautery, as we have before said; and no time is cured with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then take the avenue of the rupture enlarged according to the quantity of III degrees; and then remove the syphac that is under the skin that follows, then take a string and put it on the apparent avenue of the syphac; and press it perfectly on the abdomen, then cut the II avenues apparently of the syphac on the top of the string, and cut the one and the other; then remove the top of the string, and do not cover the syphac or extend the utters or any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you sew up the wounds, if the wound has healed and the plague is gone,
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The healing is slow, and there is no sign of rupture in the wound, and the fire cauterization has healed in that place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the shoulders
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the shoulders is softened in certain men, so that the cores that are within are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you treat it, to make a incision on the back of the man, and to cut off the soft leather over the natural leather; then sew up the two edges with one stitch or three tight stitches; then cut between the stitches, and heal it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and sew it up.
dou chastrement	a fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	I realize that chastisements are included in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak of them in this book; however, there are two reasons for this: one is that a mirror should reply when questioned about it, and the other is that we have often had to use chastisement on certain animals to help us, such as sheep, goats, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisements are made according to two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the animal in hot water, until its joints are softened and relaxed; then pick it up with your hand, so that you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the method of chastisement by cutting: it is necessary that you hold the animal in a tight grip, and then cut off its hair with your left hand, and tie up each leg with a rope, when you have well shorn them; and leave no part of the skin between the legs; and this way of chastisement is less than that which is made by attraction, because it may happen that with attraction some of the joints are not moved, so that the animal desires luxuration; then heal the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	is due to two reasons: first, it is because between the two testes there is an opening as there is in the form of nature of a woman; second, it has hair, and sometimes the urine comes out through the urethra.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and there are two testicles on the groin also as a penis and two ovaries.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure for the hermaphrodite is that you copulate with them as with others, and cure them in the same way as other wounds; but, in the second way, those men whose urine springs out through the skin of their testes should not be cured.
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	is an abnormal growth on the natural part, so much so that it is ugly to behold; and some women also have it as big as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	Il covient que tu teignes la superfluité de la tentigene à ta main ou as oncines, et la cope légierement; et n'aler mie trop em parfort, que decorremens de sanc n'i viegne, puis le cure d'autre cure tant qu'il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist à la bouche de la marris, et l'emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d'une kowe, et pour ceu l'apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is appropriate that you take the excess of the tang from your hand or nails, and scrape it lightly; and do not cut it off completely, so that there is no pain, but treat it with other remedies until it heals; and with another tool that grows at the mouth of the mare, use it, and perhaps it will jump, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called it the old "cow disease". If it is appropriate that you scrape it, as we have said above about the tang, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	of accidents
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	of accidents If nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and natured by birth, or accident by disease that has come to be; or it is by char in which there is a subtle or specific poison, and is made perfect in the marriage, or costez, or sown, or otherwise; and it hinders conception, and childbearing, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the direction of the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	For if the stooping is close and apparent, whether it is to your left or right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the subtle poison is there, and it is close to the lips, if you hurry, and then turn her; put your two fingers together, and the woman on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two lips, as long as the subtle poison remains, and the stooping is covered; then take wool, and wet it with oil, and put it on the spot, and lay the woman on her back every day, so that he cannot hold it.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the remedy is harsh and bitter, it is necessary that you take with the spatula a substance resembling a leaf of myrrh.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the stinging is of fire, then hang it on the thistle and cut it; and apply the medicines that stop the pain, as has happened before, pain of dragon, incense, a mixture of ash; and then introduce a large piece of pluck, so that the wound cannot close; and thus let it be for a long time, and introduce a sheet of dry linen; and so cure with other remedies until it is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the wound on the arm comes to be of fire, if it is necessary to cover it according to this method, let it not be infected with abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For at an abscess infected that is in the arm, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	of hemorrhoids are openings of veins whose custom is without treatment, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become thorny; and we have said in the division the appearances of ears, and signs, and I will say here those who receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thorns, when they are perfect in the pelvis, and do not appear by touch, but only by cure with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the entrance of the pelvis, one can feel them, are those who can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then bind the thorns to the sheath, and insert the cope into her roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, as we have done, and blood of dragon and incense, and similar things; then pour its feet on the wall for an hour, then let her sit in cold water; and if the pain comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit with honey, and apply it as a poultice to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it has stopped, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if it doesn't, you must blow on the back and massage without hurting; then take another, and the juice of plantain or of acacia with old wine, and blow at the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has subsided, you must keep the wound clean until it is healed; and that which is called "balath" is red, and looks like a sharp stone, so cover it as I have said before; and then keep it clean until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Come in the breast many ways of abscess come, like cancer and painful abscess and herpes and estiomens and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I die in this treatise on the abscess that comes to the breast, which is not an abscess that burns, and if you know the work of iron, then consider that the abscesses are fresh when they begin to come out, full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So then you should not hurry to pierce it, but let it die until the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit down on two small chairs or pillows so that their legs are apart from each other; and their knees spread, and tie them firmly with a good cord; then suck the bile towards the left side of the chest, and bring the instrument with which you operate on the mouth of the breast, after which comes the shape; and it is necessary that when you introduce the instrument into the breast, you insert it as deeply as it should and not more, so that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover its depth with drapes, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top of it, and wrap it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess is opened, and one holds it in the hand, if it is convenient to cover the head, let the sputum flow; and when the bowels are empty, if it is convenient that you put into the wound tents wet with oil of roses or with oil of green herbs; place the tent completely outside the wound at the bottom of the mare, and on the other side of the hand clean it with water or burned malva; then cure after two days of poulticing coming to this, until he is healed; and never raise the mare and the wound by means of a cup of water and honey, and then only of water or roots of licorice and long-rooted herbs are cooked; then bring back the poultice.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered with the mare, keep yourself from cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	For the art of midwifery, it is first necessary that she knows the natural shape of childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman rushing downwards, and desiring to smell the air: then the baby's head comes out; then you know that these childrens are according to the natural shape, and the issue is with its head, and the second one with it; and when you see these signs, then you should gently press her belly, so that the baby comes soon; for when he descends on his head, then the second one comes with him, and the husband is cleansed of his excesses by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes never but upon its feet, and comes from the neck or shoulder, or hands, or sometimes comes up its belly, or oft, and is turned round by accident on its throat, and in other evil shapes; therefore it is necessary for midwifery that she be wise and skilled in these things, and ward off error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If a man falls on his head because of natural cause and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtue of him is weak, so that she puts it on a saddle, or the women hold it; and he rises from the oil or fenugreek which is cooked, and then pours the wine between her two little nipples in this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If a man falls on his head because of natural cause and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtue of him is weak, so that she puts it on a saddle, or the women hold it; and he rises from the oil or fenugreek which is cooked, and then pours the wine between her two little nipples in this shape: and splits the second one, and ties his nail until the moisture that is inside comes out; and rubs the woman's belly with muscillaige of fenugrec with oil of sesame; then makes her rub and shake off the condescension, and keeps her mouth and nose closed for an hour: then now the baby.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, it is necessary that you pull them gently a little and a little; and if they cannot enter, let the woman sit on a chair, and lift her feet up; then take off the chair from the ground, and tie the woman so that she does not fall down; and if the hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, if he pushes his hands with the knife that is placed in front, and pulls out the child, and leaves it even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	and of the delivery of the child at its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out at its feet, then it is necessary to turn it up; and then pull it little by little until it is even; then squeeze its feet and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can't he jump just as soon as his legs come out, then instruct him to squeeze and make it vibrate with the hand; if he jumps, let God take care of him.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not turn out as we have said, if the shoulder becomes dislocated little by little until it is back in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light again.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For then it is easy again. And if it does not turn out as we have said, if the muscle of the loins and the oil of sissament, and gum dissolved, and ground up in a mortar; and put on the nature of woman inside and take off this ointment, then let her sit in water until she is wet all over; and when she is wet all over, let her put the cologne of myrrh on, and put it on, and leave it for an hour; then let her sit down, then make her sneeze and strain her mouth and nose, and squeeze her belly lightly, because the baby jumps out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the birth of the child between her legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if he puts his bail his hands little by little; then be supported on his neck, and hang his feet down, and be lying on my bed; and he bends his hands little by little, and then he takes his hands on his belly, and lifts up his testicles with a bunch of grass, so that they are removed down; and if the child does not jump, if he takes his feet and moves them, then he moves his belly upstream, then I pour my hands; and the baby is little by little; and command to the woman that she prays as long as the child is.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The child's delivery, when it comes out wide, a hand holds him back.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	When the child's delivery is difficult, a hand supports him: if it cannot be supported, let the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, let her sit on the bed, and spread her legs wide; then I will bring the instrument mentioned earlier; and if she does not give birth, let her sit on a chair, then try to support the hand; and the child according to his natural form, and make him sneeze, and command that she prays as long as the child is.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa face tornee devers lou dos sa mere
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	As the child comes out of the womb, he will spread his hands and turn his face towards his mother's back. It is necessary that the midwife hold him gently, turning him little by little, and when he is straight, she places him on a bed, and tells her to move her hips gently; and when you have done this, if you put a pillow under his bottom, she will sit down, and tells her to move her hips, and let the child fall.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	from this middle manner at all the second time
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When he comes in this way at all the second time, if you tie his second foot so that the moisture is empty; and if he catches himself on his face and on his neck, so that he does not get stuck, and dies the child; then put the child inside again, as long as you have put it in the right way, and order the woman to move her hips lightly: and then if she does so slowly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born often, and only three or four times are born; and this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an odd thing, and do not live, but one; I know that, if they are multiplied, and are devised by the physician who is tied to the bougie; and they are also born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they are born with pain, and the cure is as we have said, and if the doctor is subtle, and does quickly and lightly what he has to do; and does it well, so that he saves them.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No child is formed from one to fifteen, or more, up to seventeen, and they are all formed in the image of a child by the measure of the wise glory, and the doctor knows everything about them, for sometimes strange things happen; so he does it according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of a dead child or an abdomen, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands; if it is necessary that you know that the woman is of sound health, and has no accident which she might fear would kill her; if it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her children are inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the minister rubs her with oil from both sides, or she lies in bed so that she cannot be treated for the descent of the child; then you rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oils with althaea and fenugrec and flax seed, then you anoint the hands of the woman with these oils and these muscuraides; then you pour them into the woman lightly, then you want to pour them out where they can be suitable for what, and take care that the child is dressed in such a way that it descends on his head; then he pours the oil into his hair or col or mouth or throat or larynx or near the ribs, and the descent is on the feet, if he pours or pricks and cuts at the cost of the hands; and it is necessary that he dye the oil with his right hand, and puts the bowl between his two hands on his left, and pours it all lightly with his right hand, and pours the oil into any of the places I have said, until he comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the oil:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then take another piece of twine, or if you need it, so that the extractions are even; and then make them even by moving one way and another, so that they come out, and let the teeth of the oncines hold them, as this is their form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If one part stops, then oil two of its ends, and squeeze that part, and pull the other; and if none stop, then put this oncaine where it should be or higher up, and tie it so that all come out far away.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back by stretching, then you must wrap him in a blanket, all of it, then take the covering from the joint of the foot or the wrist, and do the same to his other hand, and to his feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l'enfant est gros et il est estrois en l'issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si convient que tu boute le spatumile espineux entre tes deux, et fent le chief et estrai l'aigue; ou tu la ront a l'estrument qui est apelez "almidach", de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cesti; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturellementment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s'elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pleux; et s'il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si convient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is trapped under its feet, then the slight pull is, and the treatment is light for the mouth of the horse.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is caught in the abdomen or breast, then cover it with a drape wrapped over your hand; and cut open the abdomen or breast until the moisture that is causing it comes out; and if another member has been dislocated and the joint remains stuck, then wrap your hand firmly around the mare's head, and pull gently; then I will saw one or two, and cut firmly; and if the mouth of the horse has become tight due to a hot abscess that has come, then it is not necessary to work, but only to soften and moisten things; and he softens them, and cuts them into water-softening and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is caught on the ribcage, and you can make it even, then treat as we have said above for a live child; and if one does not have the power, then cut it into pieces, leaving nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, bring the person who has said to us in the apothem that comes out in the water; and let them run away from blood coming, if it is stopped by restraint and let other treatments be brought.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had been killed, then another consulting about it, and another refusing to kill it.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the ten apotomes in the bowl began to swell up, and started to rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster, and in it went a bone, and after a few days others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled very much, for this woman's belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	Then I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to treat the wound, and in three hands, as long as the woman was in good shape; and she stayed there for a long time, and a little of the bone came loose from its place; and I did not remember this ointment before, except that when the master saw a strange thing, he knew how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, so we set the bones; and at two turns are formed the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the ears should be thinner than the supports and made of ebony or box; and the mouth of the funnel must be wide, and the margin of the branches must be long, about a palm and a half; and these two supports are joined at their ends, each to its own, which are firmly fixed in the mouth of the wife to open when the horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, shall be made of ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of the teeth; it should have two supports, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide; and when you open the mouth of the woman entirely with the instrument, let her sit on the bed with her legs open and the feet hanging down, then put together the two supports onto the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees; then place your hand over the entire instrument as you did with the teeth evenly, according to the quantity that you open the mouth of the woman, until the ball comes out.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted and has multiple uses; and when you see that they are prepared, the more quickly it is done, and the higher it is raised for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I don't have an instrument, you have not prepared it, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to keep her tongue between her teeth, and then make her sneeze by putting your hand on her belly and pulling down; and if she sneezes because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If he doesn't sneeze because of this, I can catch him, and make a trapdoor or lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the pregnant woman, as calamus, rue, anise, camomile, cassialine, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, are boiled or put in water over the fire; then put one corner or lid over the pot, and the other chief in the mouth of the pregnant woman, and hold it until the vapors come up inside the pregnant woman; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If jump the second time hospital.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains after this cure and is not well, order her to moisten her left hand in olive oil or muscatel wine [muscellaige de altee], and then let it fall into nature, and let it hang; and when she has found it, if she grabs it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the marrows do not break at extraction; but she must move it lightly from left to right, and then pull it out; and then she will take off her ring.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the marrow in her mouth is stiffly extracted, we have said the cure of vomiting, and fomentation of herbs; and if she does not do all that we have said, you must guard against making her vomit by forcing; but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the marrow, you bind him to the girdle of the woman, then let him enema with tetrafarmacon [a medicine consisting of four parts]; if she will and will come to health, but nevertheless, when she has done so, if a bad odor comes up to her stomach and head, and bleeds the sick person.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is appropriate then let there be suitable fumes for him: no one of the ancient ones has tried fuming with nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument by which they fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and of the second one if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of a shape resembling a dog, and one puts the head soft in nature, and the shoulders wide on fire; and let the fumes be on the coals, and the hair until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but it is pierced by a subtle syrup: if it is necessary then to let him pierce that subtle syrup at his right, and he does not pierce it with a spit, and seal the lancing so that it does not touch; then put on another moistened cloth in wine and oil, and the cure of ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, so put a peg in a hole, and let his hands be free, and be oasted when he falls down to go into the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no sudden return of the wound or abscess; if it is covered suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said above about the peg.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodulation, and more painful than those that come from the fundament or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, if it opens, and again moistens with a pale or subtle bow, and these fistulas never persist; and they are known by that which he has in excretion or venting when the sick person does so, and perhaps in a jump.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it pierces to the vesicle, and only up to half the length of the penis; and it reaches up to the juncture of the scrotum, and only up to the tip of the cow's udder.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so you will know if the fistula reaches to the perineum, and not further: and that you pierce your little finger or perineum, and pierce a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when it does not have any curves.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has any curves, if you pierce with a fine thread of rope, or hair of a horse, as far as you feel the thread or hair on your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no perforation or wind-up or blood flow, as we have said: know that it does not hurt; but if you hurry to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persisting until the bladder or until the urinary conduit, if there is urine leaking, and cannot be treated with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perceived only to the joint of the hip, if it is attempted coming up to the place; if there is no twistedness and the invention of the pain inside, if it is that he has already bowels, and cannot be treated with medicine or remedy by finger pressing; and in these persisting fistulas there is no cure but labor, and vanity of foolish mirages which enter into them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one which is not persisting and is not ancient, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and let the legs go up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his belly; then pour a bucket of rain, or of water if there is twistedness, until you know where the fistula comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the fundament, then you should insert your index finger, you will feel that the tent is pierced; and if it is uncovered or you feel between your thumb and the syph, you know that it is persistent; if not, it does not work so that it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	If the patient experiences pain in the fundament, you should insert your index finger, and you will feel that the tent is pierced; and if it is uncovered or you feel between your thumb and the phlegm, you know that it is persistent; if not, it does not work so that it can be healed. Now I will explain how to treat some of them well, but this only works sometimes; and the aid that you give, if you heat the small cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above; and pour it directly into the fistula, as many times as you feel that these charred things are burned, which look like a bird's feather; and then cure with wet cloth, until the char falls off, and then cure with ointment, binding the char and sealing it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If then is so, it is good. But if not, he cannot be healthy; and if he tries to stand up, and does not pierce until at the root which is at the foundation, and has between his two feet a thick covering of cloth or of medicine, and you see the fistula at that covering where it begins; then the cope of the beginning of the fistula, and press forward again before the covering, and after cauterization, as long as it comes to the top of the covering; and will be delivered the covering, and he will be well; then I fear those covered cars which seem a feather of an owl, and there remains neither.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pain does not go away, and presses between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or with medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two things: that is to say, the burning of these joints that are put together, and the cooling of blood and the drying of the moist; then cure the tents that are wet with a kind of mud or a dry thing, as long as they run down, and burn these cars in the mud; then cure the wound with medicines that are hard and dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored, so is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the foundation, and is distant from the body, let it be broken at the foundation, and query this one.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	And if you feel the tent, and it is there the fabric or the syringe or the char, or it is ready to pierce, then there is only way of engagement and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you can put tents and cure it as first; and do not go too far in the perfection, so that you cover the tent which holds the foundation, and bring the effusions by the voluntary way; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the world then it is cut away from the foundation, or with a tent or another instrument pointed; then mend this rotten thing which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part away from the foundation: it will be a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times that are fists according to this way: and when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or costs on the foundation of the delicate skin on top, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put two wires in two, and put the tent on all the wire in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation within, then remove the wire from that one, so that you put your two at the foundation; and draw the head of the wire, and join together the two shoulders, and pull them apart, and leave them for a day or two; and do not hold back any time, as long as the wires cross those lines that are between two, and rub against each other; then cure the wound until it is sewed up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If it does not perforate, if you pierce it with all your might, it will not be too much.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make the wound tighter if it is already too tight, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spikelet from which one makes the fistula is so sharp that it pierces on one side and cuts on the other; and on this side it should not be tighter than on that side, so that it does not cause pain, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: they may be inside the fundament, like a grain of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and they may be tied together tightly; or they may be outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have a little moisture, and sometimes a little blood, and they are red in color; and the cure for those inside the fundament is this: order the patient to strain himself by sitting on chambers until the fundament moves, and then let him go; if you hurry, and grasp them with your fingers, or hold them between your nails, then cut off their roots; and if they do not stay because of their moisture, catch them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and pull them out with your hands, then cut them off, and powder them with hot powders that are for cauterizing; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cautery; because other cures do not cure them until they are healthy; and if the fundament cannot come out, then clisterize the patient with a clisterizing fluid that is harsh and sharp to wash out what is inside the fundament, so that it can come out freely; when the patient is strained, and the roots of the hemorrhoids have gone out from the fundament, then loosen them gently; and grasp them with your fingers or pliers, and cut them off, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and let them avoid being incised with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch in this way: take a tortuous thread, and bottle it in a needle, and then wind the thread around the top of the needle and pierce the other end through, and join the two ends of the thread at the needle's eye, and if they are wide apart; twist the thread into a form, then tie the knot, remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, and leave it to drain off the blood; then put on the foundation a moistened cloth oiled with rosewater or wax, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest; and then let him remain as long as he is sewing, and when he has finished sewing, he is to be treated with ointment and other cures until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying out at the end in the intestine, and by necessity of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no longer effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you cut off the skin from a spit or your finger above it, which you do not leave to dry; then treat it until it is firm as it should be; and if it cannot be treated, then begin to shave it more severely than before, until it heals and is skinned; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	he will sweat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	There is a small appearance of decay before the shoulder, and it swelters perfectly; and there is no pain when it is cut, and one can feel it everywhere like death from sweating, and it spreads all over the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a string from an ostrich egg, or a strong vulture feather, and put that string on the sweating, until the purple circle covers the sweating all around; then turn your hand to hold all around the sweating with the whole string, until you cut it all around, and make it perfect, and skin the sweating from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a ring of a dog's or iron's shape according to this form, and be subtle and draw over it:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't pierce him, so that he holds the two together, and presses: And if you see, cauterize the pain, as it is before or with fire-chapitre of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the ball
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one makes a ball of silver or oak wood, or melted bronze or lead; and no one makes these small or large instruments, according to the ones that are brought to them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore one should bring according to the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the ball is small and big if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say there is an opening where the belly is tied together, so that you see it, and the abdomens are pierced from within; and there is one hole on one side, and another on the other; and let the medicine be put into a bladder of cow's milk or parchment, and pierce all around each hole, and between each hole put I yard of thread, then bottie in these holes a strong thread twisted in X or thread around, and tie up the belly as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies before a strong thread, then let it be clisterized; and this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and grease the head of the clister with oil or oak-moisture or a similar thing, then bottle it lightly; then the ministers spread themselves out their two hands together as long as he is quite dry, then remove the clister, and lift up the patient's legs against the wall, and pour out the medicine, if possible, and if he sleeps a whole night, then it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you bandage him for a disease of decay of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then remind him until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then is the cautery also as subtle as for a child; and that is the form of the cautery subtle where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds; but we will now tell you about the treatment of hands and medicine, according to fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the hitting of a stone, and the cutting with a sword or a knife, or a lance or a staff or a spear, or similar things; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds, for the reminder will come in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes where the bone is not broken, take care if it is from movement of stone or similar things, and the skin is indeed torn and the wound is great, and you doubt about the temp of the abscess: so do as soon as possible healing from the head itself if it comes from blood of the wound, and let the healing be in the opposite part of the wounded part; and avoid the repletion of wine and meaty food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not heal, if its meat is weakened, and do not drink wine, nor eat cheese; and put on the wound, if the abscess is hot, cotton moistened with oil or wine, and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the wind, powder, which I will say a little later; and if he has moved it, put on some onions, as long as he heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large as a sword-blade and similar, the lips cannot be brought together by tenderness, but if they are brought together by sutures, as I will say to the wounds of the belly, from the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And if the wound is uncovered by bone, and deep, and holds only for one patch, then cover it; but cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as testicles and cooked wheat, as well as poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rust on the bone, and it has not penetrated deep enough, then cover it; but cure it with medicine, and if there is rust on an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by bandaging, then cut the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light; and that you put this powder in it so that fire makes it move.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of this powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live clay three parts, and the powder finely, and apply to the wound, and bandage it together, until it heals well and joins all its blood; and then bind it firmly, and leave it untied, unless it swells; for you do not stop the medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make this of the live clay alone, unless you have incense or dragon' blood, but that fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fire has moved the wound, at least put it in this powder; but put on some herbs digested, or grains of wheat flour made with water and honey, until it dries; then heal it with other treatments as long as it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with tiny hooks; and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the neck, if there is no other device but to let the cure take place, and not put anything restraining, for it harms the neck and makes it retreat; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuation with the brain, which is the highest limb; but be the medicine sweet, as hot water washed with olive oil, and also washed with fresh water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and oiled with wet.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, so that it costs much to bind with strips, then treat until he is well.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he is wounded and filled with bowels, and the wound penetrates or goes lower down; and if the artery is cut, and the flow of blood comes from it, and his breathing is difficult, and his throat is blocked, and his voice is hoarse, then treat him with oil; and if the pain in the throat is severe, and there is swelling, then bind it tightly, so that the meat does not touch it, but let it recover its natural shape; and then release it little by little, and leave it for a few days, and treat it with herbs until he is well; and if the wound has penetrated the bone, then seek to free it completely, and if you can't, then leave it until it putrefies and comes out on its own, and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the ointment.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the lance or sword wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	For if it is a lance or sword wound, and the wound is deep, then observe the patient: since then the wound is deadly; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh throughout all its length, then do not put the powder to him at first hour lest he vomit blood utterly, and let him lie down, and ease the pain of the patient; but apply an ointment which draws out moisture, and let him sleep on his back for three days, or four, or more; if then there will be no spasm, nor a bad quake of the body nor strangulations; and when you see that the bones are in order, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of tents and other cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, then make sure there is no fistula, and perform the cure accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife and is simple, deep, or at the spine, then cure it like this: if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, powder it, and if it has penetrated bone and broken into pieces, then cut the wound, and the traitors with it if they are there; and if they are not, then let the wound pus out, which will ease the extractions; and for other wounds to other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the abdomen is large and medium and small; from a large wound, the intestines do not always come out, or the intestines do not enter again, so that they become swollen, sometimes freezing, so that they re-enter, and for this reason a small wound is less painful than a large one, because it takes longer for the intestines to move again; therefore, the intestines remain in place, and for this reason they swell, sometimes freezing; but as for the rupture of the abdomen, there are three ways: common sutures come from the abdominal suture, and the suture of other wounds from the trunk and other proper sutures are common with other wounds; however, they are also proper with the abdominal suture, and I will describe each one separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestines out, and there is something to put back, this is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in the third manner: moisten a sponge or a soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in hot water and cicero and spice, and remove the intestine as much as the swelling is relieved; and do not stop doing this, and let it rest that it may be souled to relieve.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or heat it and cook some vegetables, because in this way the entrance is little used; and if it cannot enter, if you make a small cut in the wound with the instrument where you cut the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to let it rest, that we do not cut it unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument to split it: if you cut it inside and turn it away, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the gut has broken loose, if you can reset it to its natural position in its own proper place, for this deserves care.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two sides, then raise the head and chest higher than the parts below; and in this way it is necessary to treat what I have said in large and painful wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you will prepare the patient, then between your hands place a piece of cloth that covers all the rupture, and join the lips; and this is the common way of sewing, and it is necessary to take an needle or more, according to the size of the wound, then leave a little space from the top of the wound, and insert a needle there, leaving a double thread at both ends, then join the two ends of the wound together, and then leave a little space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what is necessary for the needles, until all the wound is sewn; and the needles should be medium-sized, because small ones will not cover the whole fabric, and large ones will not fit well: therefore, it is necessary that they are medium-sized; and it is not good to push the needles too far from the edge of the fabric and the skin, so that they do not go through and open the wound before the stitch is taken; and then tie the ends of the needle, so that they do not sting the patient when he sleeps, and I put blankets or sheets over the ends of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound has healed; and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because the second stitch is common, and it is necessary to join the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the fabric together with a needle or more, according to the size of the wound, then when you have pierced these edges together, return the needle to the part where you began, like how people sew clothes; and leave a space between each stitch of half an inch. This stitch heals a man who had a wound in his honor, or belly, which was torn by a knife, and it was a wound of more than a palm's width, and the intestines were out about two palms' width, and the wound was at the bottom of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought the intestine back after it had been out for XXIIIII hours, and the wound healed in XV days, which I treated, and it was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not treat it with ointment, because I was in a place where we do not find it, nor any medicines; and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch: take the needle and pierce it from the outside to the inside; when it has pierced the right amount on the right side, so that you can see the hole you have made on the other side, and the thread comes out of this hole; and the understanding of this stitching is such that you also sew like how the furrier does with the furs, and you leave the zip from one side, and take it back from the other, until the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of sewing, which Galiens explains properly, is if it is so as any font, which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the heads to the other head in this way: thread an needle or head of hair next to the mirror, and pierce that side only, and leave the two heads of hair; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the part further away until you reach those inside, on both heads of hair; then pierce each of them from the part further away until you reach those inside, on the other two heads of hair that are one on the other side; and this is the method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens says this word, and no one testifies, that one must sew the belly to two needles, or there is thread in each; and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew things like mermaids; and know that when the tear is in the middle of the belly, this sewing is more painful than the others of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l'ait muee, si remet arer l'intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l'ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se tu n'as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu'ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k'il soit sanez.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Since you don't have any other medicine in most cases of simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound will spread to the main limbs, then cover it with a light oil, or rose water, and place it between the folds, and clean the blisters; and often this comes about, if the blood is black, and more frequently comes from the intestine; and pierce it inside, and know that when the large intestine is involved, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is because of the openings into which it enters, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and its nearness to children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the arrow jumps out of the wound, then put it back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it has become yellow or black, you must find the spot that is black, from which there comes blood without stop, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the bones, and hang the two heads down on the side of the wound until the extraction takes place when the head jumps out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some cases, unless I tell you that a honour has been torn or wounded by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was defecation and vomiting; then I put on a cure according to what I could find, and did not stop being subtle until it was healed, and tied up the openings.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him souded, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly; and there was no evil, but stayed in better dispositions, eating and drinking; and said no experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that he must be bound up in some way: take twine from great testicles, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the twine had opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it should extract his mouth from; and then he grasps the head, and this stays so that he cannot untie, then puts another thong after in the same way as before, until the wound is all bound up; and count the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief of the gut is inflamed, and there is no injury to the patient, and the gut can be bound up with a very fine twine cut from the intestine of an animal, in some way: take the chief of this gut-twine that is well separated, and then bind together the chief of this gut-twine with a very fine lin thread twisted, then knot the thread in the needle, and in counting the gut, and cutting it back; and this method of twine sewing is only good according to the path of fiance and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the small intestine grooves, there is no medicine nor health, save by subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that he is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	I know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is called a fistula in general, and even more so when it has been cut and is exuding pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the verdant definition a dry and white nodule, in which there is no pain, and it is also chewed like the feathers of an eagle; and it does not break out clear and thick, nor does it break out thin and sparse; nor does it break out at all, and that has been spoken about in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no pain, this is only by one of the VIII causes: namely, by the smallness of blood or corruption; or by its malice; or because there is something hard inside it, and on the lips, which does not allow a birth; or because there is too much pus; or because the lees are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or because the medicine is not good in the cure; or because that which is corrupt is like pestilence in nature; or because digestion and health are late in that region, and flee by nature; or because there are veins or bones: and I have already outlined all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula, which is made by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas may occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins and arteries and nerves or to the sinew, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if one part comes to the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of great cure, and there is nothing but work and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the principle member, and you have engaged to cure it, and you have become acquainted with it, then take a tent of lead or iron; if the fistula is straight, seek it out; and if the fistula is twisted, seek it out with a thin tent of plies, for the plies bend around the twist; and if the fistula has broken hands and you cannot find it well with tents, then clean it out with a sharp blade, for it will be moistened if one part breaks into another, and then clean it out thoroughly with your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut completely, and ask the patient of pain that he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels pain; and when you have truly known the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut it according to what I have said, and heat the forge and the corrupt tendrils that are within; and then cure it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right direction, it is necessary that you cut it completely, as much as you can, then put moistened tents in medicine water, and pour them all the way to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that is held at the bottom; and then put oilmens in rust-corroding oil, as long as it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If in a wound you feel a main member, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, so long as the corruption is all over the bone, then treat with things that hinder injury as long as it is healthy; and if it is not healthy, wrap it up as before, knowing that you have not come yet: uncover and examine until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this does not work, know that the corruption is too great that you cannot come to it; if there is no other obstacle than to loosen by nature; and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with the right tool for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, but do not leave any; and if moisture causes you difficulty, and there is no mistake or fear, cut and moisten and warm, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put something on the wound that is irritating and leaves it covered with pus, and leave it as long as the pus remains between the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then hold back the corruption as much as possible until all the bone is blackened, then cover the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption and it has reached the socket of the bone, then it is necessary to make it and cover it completely up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is hardened. And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help with your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about XXX years who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered the body, so that the matter came to the leg and formed a large abscess, and he had no clear reason for opening it; but because of their foolishness they opened it so much that much matter came out, and became a fistula, and it went so far that everyone felt sick at the sight, and often wet the body with sweat; and many times I treated him over a period of II years, and there was no healing in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines they used to treat him, and what flowed out through the fistula; and the color of his body became red, and had an orange tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these clefts, and then searched all the clefts, and I found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly moved then, and dug into one of the clefts as far as I discovered part of the bone, and I found it corroded and pierced, and the corruption went up to the bone inside; I knew what appeared to me of the corroded bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption than that which I had; and I began to heal the wound with medicines by long time, and could not patch it up; and then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and knew it, and then dug it out, and leaned over to patch up the hole; but I couldn't patch it up because I dug into about a palm of the bone, and brought it back to all its strength, then healed it with medicines; and it was healed and patched up tightly, and didn't need to be redone for the weakness of the sick person, who couldn't stand it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car by the evacuation of blood it often happened, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone there grew up a hard callus, and he had a good disposition and did not have any harm or contrary from all and everything, nor did he have the air or come to anything.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	If the bone is broken in any part of the skull, then it should be done as follows: take a thread, and bring it to the head of the bone that is open, and command someone to pull it upwards; and put another thread of a larger size than the first thread, and tie it over the callus that is above the bone, and release the head, so that you draw out the rotten callus from above, and uncover the callus on the spot where you see and feel the corruption, and do this again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et if the nose is corrupted and does not open anymore, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole nose; then put a hot coals on it, and then apply silk from one part to another of the corruption, and let the silk come out of the long part of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the corrupted joint, and let the silk go into the bone where the other part is; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other pain but that of covering; and if the corruption is at the knuckle or at the toe, it is very strong. However, you must inquire about that corruption, how it opens for you; and purify it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you; and know that the incision and silk to cover these bones are many, according to the sitting of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And because of this, it is necessary to prepare for each form of work its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will have to use, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument in which you will have need according to what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	a fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	dou feu
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, cover the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up any further; and if it comes up to the arm, cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, there is only death, and no saving force but the quantity of its virtue; and so do as soon as the corrosion comes or starts: if it comes to the first joint, cover after the other joint; and if it comes down, cover all over; and if it ascends up the leg, cover at the knee joint; and if it comes up to the knee, there is only one thing that can save the patient from death, namely to cut off the limb below the knee joint; and let ministers take two strips of linen cloth, and tie them on either side of the limb with a wide strap, so that the linen does not touch the healthy part, and let the corrosion come out onto the cloth; then cover or wrap it up, and put a patch of linen over each strip, so that the wrapping does not touch the healthy part, and let the corrosion come out onto the cloth.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the pain comes when you work, then cauterize the place well, or put on certain powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to the man at home in some pain: he got a blackness that seemed like fire burned; and this corrosion came first of all on his foot, so much that it blushed all over the foot; and when the man saw the corruption, then he covered it with a lid, and was healed; and after a long time the corruption returned in two places from the hand, and came to me, and I put things that hit after purifying the body, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that he would cut off his hand, and I did not want that, that I had hope of hitting the matter; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, that he would not die, because the virtues of man were weak; and he was in despair all, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with a lid, and was healed; and I have heard this only that others might do other things, if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	None times comes abscess in the leech-wound, and delays so long that it makes great assembly of bowels; and then retires and pierces, and jumps the bowels, and remains the viscero-visceral view, as well as our vassals; and the skin which is above is also thin like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have promised that the skin will burn, and corruption is not perfect, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption. If you have vowed that the skin will burn, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick like the drapelz unraveled, and does not corrode at all until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so long that it comes to the bone perfectly, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is so that you cope this skin all around, and most when it is thin, as well as our drapelz; and does not burn at all for its corruption.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in perfect health, then do not let them be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the navel properly as you see fit, so arrange it in such a way that the bowels run down to the lowest point they can reach, for when the bowels are in perfect health, then do not let them be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the navel properly as you see fit, so arrange it in such a way: that the bowels run lightly downward, leaving nothing of the bowels; and take medicines that strengthen the stomach, placed over the shirt of linen that covers all the stomach; then cover at the forces place the hole of the navel plus wide than the first, for ointments are applied to the other shirt according to the quantity of the hole, and put it over the hole of the stomach to make the bowels lighter, and do not remove the large shirt until after many days once; and he who is over the hole of the navel often removes to remove the bowels, and know what runs from the bowels, if it is poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested; and take heed that the patient feels pain or no, and whether there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has extended in such a way that you see the nature that rises over the hole of the stomach, so know that the breasts are already coming to life, and approach the healing; then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, if change another shirt, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts grow upright after many days, for they do not rise.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long after a time, then do not despair of health, for the health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are those whose breasts late in rising up, and they do not rise; and if the breasts grow upright after many days, know that the breasts do not rise because of late growth; and if the breasts late in growing, and are twisted, then apply medicines that dry out their substance and dry them out in usefulness, as if burning them finally, for there is much vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take care to burn it completely and mix it with oil, and water it down with fair wine of equal substance; then cook it and use it; and that same way makes better honey cooked thick, when the burning of vitriol is not present, or you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind them together, and powder them on the honey when it is taken from the fire; then put it in a sackcloth, and spread it out on the breast, and do not administer it often, and roots of heaven, which are also like flour of times and hundred; and use these simple or compound medicines: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long, know that corruption has taken hold, and it impresses on the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the cure of the cure of fistulas, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the nail of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A pimple is an abcess that may rise from the nail of the finger or other part of the hand, or even elsewhere; and when it has broken open, and no attention is given, then it becomes a deep abscess, and corrections and bloodletting are carried out at the root of the nail, and perhaps even all of it; and the corrosion extends up to the bone, so much so that there is great pain and putrefaction, and the two nails become wide apart, and the color changes.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not take place, then cut off all the excess that has been reserved from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses on the flesh, and irritates it, then cut off the nail where it presses, and bottle up water there, and gently and lightly apply medicine to the root of the nail, and put out all the water; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corruption est dans l'os, alors le coupe, et pratique une traction ferme, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois le dos se corrompre, alors pratique la méthode décrite ci-dessus pour le traiter tant qu'il soit guéri ; et s'il est blessé, enfonce un marteau dans l'ongle de la spatule en le frappant de travers dessus, et veille à ce que la coupure ne atteigne pas l'articulation qui est au-dessus de l'ongle, car le patient ressentrait une douleur excessive ; et s'il arrivait qu'une chose soit placée sur quoi apaiser.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	la douleur du poignet de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	La douleur au poignet de la main peut être causée par une articulation mal alignée ou une fracture, et non par un os ou un ongle cassé. Dans certains cas, la douleur peut provenir de la présence de tissu charnu entre les os du poignet.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born between two joints must not move, and he who is born at a joint must not move by chance; the size of that which is charnous is so light, in some way: cut him at his root with a broad spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of a joint is hard to cure: if you hold him in copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or must be born at the derrien nout, it is necessary that you first cut the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, and then cure him until he is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cut that joint, so that the parts repair themselves according to their natural forms; then put between two rags or drapes moistened with oil rosin, so that they do not soud; or put between two pieces of thin cloth, until their edges are souded, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it touches with its palm any of its two sides, then strike as is right.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vices are great envelopes full of superfluous melancholy that come from the members of the body; and more comes in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not administer any cleansing of the bowels, and then cure it from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure for iron is done according to two ways: one is that you strike them, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you leave the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size should be according to this way: arise the first leg of the warm water very well, until the thick blood is slightly thinned, and then draw the leg of the ill person from above the thigh all the way down to the knee; then strike the vein in its middle, or in two or three, with a wide size, and then drain and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one side chief to the other, as much as the virtue of the ill person can bear; and then lie down, and orders that he stain himself with meat by drinking black brew; and then begins the evacuation and cure when the veins are empty, and wash the ill person.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is deformed and twisted and wrapped together, and it does not stand straight, as we have said, then it is necessary that you cut it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the shape of iron which we cover over the vis if it is curved, and do not cut it, so that it covers the vein; and it is very thick because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and this causes putrefaction which comes from within the skin, like that which goes down into the torso between the skin and the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the onset of this disease are that an extremely large inflammation comes into the leg, then the joints change, and the vein begins to come out, just as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the signs of the onset of this disease are that an extremely large inflammation comes into the leg, then the joints change, and the vein begins to come out, just as the root of a plant. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never cut into this vein, and least of all when it is opened in the joint of the foot, or at the foot itself, for then there is a great risk of bleeding, and that should be curbed as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that are born between leather and cloth
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff fever," because it often occurs in buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and cloth, and goes up and down all over the body, feeling hot as it moves from one member to another, until it comes out of the skin, and sometimes it twists into knots; and it is infected with pus, just like worms, scabies, and lice; and there is suspicion of its malice, for when it runs through the body, and comes to the head, and enters the oil, it may turn back and destroy the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	Quant tu le vois guérir et tirer, si ne peut on qu'à cause il va: si convient donc que tu lies le lieu desus et désoz d'un fort lien bien estreintement, puis cople sus et le tire fur, et se li vers est em parfort en la char, et tu ne le trouves, si le cautère de feu sur, tant qu'il meurt; et les plus grands malheurs que il fait, si est qu'il courent l'oil, si com nos avons dit; et si tu le vois venir ou chef près de l'oil, si étire hors lui le sorcil forment, puis cople sus, et le tire fur; et convient user le malade de mundification de cors de médecine solutives pour les maux humors pourries, et s'averse de viandes enjanrante pourriture.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	For the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and moves from one member to another; and I have seen this myself.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and I discovered that her arm was swollen, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and then later, it came up as high as a worm at the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another; the pain left the position where it was, and entered into the shoulder, and then a little while later, it spread throughout her whole body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that her body was twisting around in pain, as I saw it myself.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I have never seen this disease manifest in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l'avoies mie veulent si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c'estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n'aperensie mie selonc ceste raison à ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinne repones.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	Yet likewise, I have heard that many who suffer from this disease feel great pain and often let out cries; if you put them to bed, and then cover them tightly, and after that, until the constriction of wind lets up a little, and you cauterize the site; and if you do not pay attention to their hairs, you should treat them with pills made from foul-smelling herbs, and serapin pills, and other similar things.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Of arrows there are several, according to their appearance and according to the places of their entry into the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	There are several types of arrows depending on their appearance and the places they enter the body. Some have large tips, others are small, some have feathers, some are souded, and some have two angles; some have tongues and some are pieces; and some enter a limb primarily in a certain way - for example, the brain, liver, stomach, pancreas, kidneys, intestine, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it enters any part of these limbs and the death sign, which I will describe later, appears, you should then remove the arrow, because death often comes after certain arrangements; and if this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, you should pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l'os, et sault li sfyafuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quan scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d'entendement, et vomissements de cole; et par aventure ist sans fuere des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure perd la parole et la voix; et sault de la plaie moistore blanche semblant a pouls, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t'aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s'elle n'est ens.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And the sign of the shoulder when it is dislocated or pricked, is that it is near the left breast, and feels as though it were stuck to something hard, not empty; and by chance the shoulder will move like a pulsing bird, and there will be shortness of breath and coldness, and fainting: so one should know that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has hit is that there is no pain from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow hits in the cover of the chest, then it hurts the ribs little by little; and it causes great pain and grief and sighing; and all the limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits in the stomach, perhaps there is no pain from the wound, but something indigestible comes out of the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits in the belly, and there is no passage of faeces through the intestines, then there is no hope for healing or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow hits in the bladder, and the urine comes out and runs away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if the face and neck and throat and shoulder and aid and spine and back and buttocks and legs and limb are saved according to some arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the bone or artery, and it does not poison, so that I will tell you that it happened to me, so that you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me at home that an arrow hit in the root of the neck: I took it out, and pulled it from the other side, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I took out a arrow that hit in the fat of the oil from the paper, and the arrow was removed, and I did not feel any pain, except for a little bit behind my ear, where the arrow had gone; it was an arrow from a blue-green arrow, and I felt lightened without pain; no accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I thrust an arrow into the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow at the ears; I knew the beards, and thinned them as I thrust, and the Christians were healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I thrust an arrow into the chest of a man, who had either a beard or a belly, and I thought he was dying; but then after thirty days he did not die; so I cut the arrow, and attached it, and thrust it in, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man who has been shot with an arrow in the back or in the chest, and the wound is sealed; keep the arrow inside, and do not change its natural position, nor will you find any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man who had been shot with an arrow in the face, and the wound was sealed; so he suffered great pain; and many others too.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I made an arrow for the king of the princes at home, which had been shot through the neck, and was slightly bent on the right side; and the arrow was all drawn out. I was called to treat after it had been shot three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I probed it with great care, and felt nothing; but he felt pain and prickling on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put plaster on its hole with a soothing and digestive substance, so that it would not inflame; and I saw the king's wound from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for three days, and the wound healed very quickly, and the king felt the arrow in his neck for a long time after, until one day he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put upon the wound a corrosive medicine by means of a jet, so long as it was open, and tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which had taken its place; then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until I could clearly see the head of the arrow; and after four months, I spread the wound wide, and pulled it apart on both sides, and it would not come out; so then I stopped from subtlety and invention of ways to make instruments, until one day I got hold of some well-made pliers, according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, so long as I held it, and closed the wound again.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; so I restored it then, and welded the wound shut, and healed the patient completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or t’ai dit the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, for the books can not all take; but the master sages compare on well-little thing, and on that which is present and failing, trueve nine oevre, and nuef instrument, in the disintegration of foreign things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are not members or they are stuck except according to two ways: either by their place where they enter, or by another part; and that which jumps out of its place, is an arrow entering into their flesh, and never jumps again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, let it be as long as the flesh is rotten inside, and is relieved; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, so leave it for a few days, and then try again; and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, pierce her inside with all subtlety, as long as the flesh inside is enlarged, and then draw it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes through one of the vents of the skull, and some of the accidents that I said open to the patient: if I do not pull it out, but leave it as long as it is even after a few days, because if the arrow comes to syph, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck further than the base of the bone, and does not come to syph, and the patient remains for some days without any bad accident, then the device for pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck very deep and cannot come out, I will administer tar with oil, as I told you; then cure the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is stuck in the center of the chest so that it cannot be seen, seek it with all your strength; and if you feel it, handle it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot reach it because of the depth of the wound, cut or bend the skin around it, so that you can take hold of it; and carefully do not break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily; and if there are ears on either side of the arrow, which hang down from where they are stuck, break or bend them both sides, so that you can pull out the arrow; and with great care do not break the arrow, or else you will make the wound worse.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, let him lie down until he is well again; then remove it, for extraction causes bleeding.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the pain from extraction troubles you, apply the remedy we have described in this chapter of the ointment; and be careful not to cut into the nerve or vein, and do not remove the arrow without danger, slowly or firmly or loudly; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do it, put him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or which does not open anything inside, or the wound is swollen in a particular place so that it can be seen or felt: therefore cut off above, as long as the pliers can take hold of it, and then extract it: do not wait now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the hole, then take it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be taken out, let it remain a little longer, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out; and if it is stuck in the arrow, take all of the arrow out with it; and if it is lodged, and you have an instrument that can cut it out, so that the point of the arrow enters into the handle of the instrument; and then push it out, and if the arrow has been cut out, push the instrument that cuts into the tip of the arrow, so that the extraction is easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has hit a blood vessel, it is necessary that you cut all of the flesh around where the blood comes out, if you can, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow enters at the throat or at the abdomen or at the bladder or at the side, and it is near to coming out, then you may cover it with a cloth, if it covers; and be careful not to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, this is work; and heal as long as it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to extract arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and thus is their form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do this: great, medium, and small, depending on the length of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the hammerhead is also like the beak of an owl, to hit the tip of the arrow, just as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of pliers for driving and for extracting, if it is this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins that are treated are XXXI in number, of which XVI are located at the head: two which lie behind the ears, called "dous herbech"; and the two arteres which run along the temples; and two veins which lie in the two cheeks from the two lips, called "aspires"; and the vein that lies at the forehead; and the vein that lies at the root of the neck; and the two glands which are at the base of the skull; and the two veins which run along the sides of the mouth, called "augeherich"; and the two veins which lie behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly treated are V in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, which lies along the left side and is called by the lay people "voinne du chief"; its partner is called "faste" and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and is called by the lay people "voinne du cuirasse"; and the basilic lies on the right side and is called by the lay people "voinne du ventre", and is located above the fistula, and is that which is treated, opening clearly upward on the bucket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinne: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee "nesse", que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinne desoz celles.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salvature is the vein that runs between the thumb and the index finger, or if it affects two fingers; and in the leg and at the foot there are three salvatures: one is dislocated from the corbicle of the left side of the thigh, and the second is the one that is at the ankle of the right side; and the salvature called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three salvatures dislocated from those. The salvature that runs behind the ears helps with old cataracts and migraine; and the quality of the salvator, as I have said to you, is that you place your chief on the patient's neck, and rub it where the salvatures run under the ear; then grasp them between your thumb and forefinger, and feel for the pulse behind your hand, and when you feel a beat there, apply pressure; then stretch out the limb with all its joints, and cut through both of them, and draw blood until you see it; then remove it and bind it, until it is healed; and I have already spoken about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainneanciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie vormen, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The surgery for the front vein is as important as the surgery for the head as regards the ancient diseases of the face, and migraine, and night-blindness; and its quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears, then take the instrument called a 'fosseur', whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and fix it with your hand or something else, and let blood according to the quantity that you see; then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never work it with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flame must not be too hot; and the surgery is transverse, because the bone is near, and the flame may break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The surgery for the two veins that are in two limbs, if it helps with baldness, and with eczema, and night-blindness, and eye pain; and the quality of their surgery is that the patient twists his neck without tying it, as we have said before; then slice, a little with a long flame a little wide, for there is no need to bind.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is hot, by chance it will break; then make the blood flow, as much as you need, and then tie it up with a cloth, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if it is hot, by chance it will break; then make the blood flow, as much as you need, and then tie it up with a cloth, and tie it well.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And if it is hot, by chance it will break; then make the blood flow, as much as you need, and then tie it up with a cloth, and tie it well.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	the health of the lips provides help for the teeth in the mouth, and for the corruption of the gums, and cuts on the lips, and pain in the ears.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you recognize them by their being black, and by the fact that they are small: so take the thickest of each of them, and do the same to the two veins that are above and below, because it is a middle way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	the health of the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is to the contraction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the doctor is that the patient chews between your hands before the sun, and the tongue, and look at them both, one on each side, a black vein: so heal them both, and do not overdo it too much, because they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly treated there are done so in two ways: either they are poked with a very sharp, wide nail; or they are pinched with a very thin olive twig and are called 'aneseled'; they are thick and thin according to the thickness and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire is sharp, as it is named, and is wide where you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the flat veins that are thick with apparent blood and contain thick blood and turmoil; and this is the shape of the fire-olive twig.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is thinner pointed, and is to treat subtle veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with many illnesses that affect the throat, neck, chest, and stomach; and it is necessary for the person treating to thoroughly wash, and to bind up the artery that is above.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he grasps the earth, and the pain of the scar comes, if it is necessary to stop it, as I said; and it should not be grabbed by the flame, but cut off like an animal's tail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, if it is necessary to remove and change another one; or you do not want any rain of it, or you heal in its place the vein by cutting off the arm: it opens clearly; and it grasps the flame like an animal's tail, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the place of the wound, it is necessary to remove and touch the arm as much as you can know the hairs; then mark the edge of the skin, and then tie the arm, and grasp the vein of the flame like we have said; and guard against injury when you cut in the artery, for it is the artery: be careful.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it oozing out from the top like urine from a child, and his bottom is red and slimy, know that this is pus from the artery: hurry then, and place your thumb on it for a long time, then remove your thumb when it stops coming out, so that it may happen again; tie him up, and leave him, and don't move the patient; and be afraid, and don't move him until he gets better.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if his bottom does not stop oozing and it keeps coming out, and the medicine is not applied to him, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the shoulder is retarded; stop the oozing.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of castor oil, knead it, and tie one half to him tightly until the next day; if his bottom still oozes, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops the flow of blood, as we have said before, for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfant, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtilitat, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	The surgery in the middle of the vein, so that the blood flows from the top, and the neck of the head, because it is made up of the base and the head, as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to wrap his hand around the neck very tightly, so that he does not move at all, or else the nerve will be cut, and if he cuts too much, the nerve will swell and the patient will suffer great pain and injury. This nerve is cut many times, and if it does not cut it in any man because of its subtlety, then you must cut it with an anesthetic tool; and exercise caution when working on the nerves.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The doctor of the head who helps, so that he hurts the heart and helps the eyes; and it is necessary to save by piercing with the olive flame or with the torch flame, for this is the most saved of all veins, because it does not have nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, the easier way, it is necessary to try the lighter first, and do not harm anything if one fails the first time, and start again; and by chance the joints inflame some men, because one failed the first time, but it does not hurt anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the incision is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about incision, it is that incision is only performed to preserve health and prevent future diseases; and it is done in one of the three veins: head, neck, and base of the skull; and it should be done at the beginning of prayer, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it should be done on the first day or third day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The doctor who is cured of the disease has no determined fever, but whenever there is a need for food or drink, at all hours and in all seasons; and it does not suit that doctors treat children until they are 12 years old, and women only from the fourth month to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Doctors should not treat the elderly who are over 60 years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	If one is to be cured, in whatever way, it is necessary that they determine the cause of the disease by examining the feces, if there is blood retained, so that the intestines do not attract the harmful excess waste to the main members; and it does not suit to cure those who are too bloated from meat, or alcohol, as long as it is possible, or yarrows; and one should not cure after a passion of colic, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination due to a woman, labor, staying up late, fasting, and various other things that weaken the virtue, whether by an weapon or by the cors; then gently the humors, if they are thick, through meat, drinks, and medicines, if you have any; then go into a bath, or swim, if nothing helps, to gently heal the sanc, and cure the vein around the testicles, as we have said; and keep yourself from work, fasting, lust, and similar things; and be quiet and calm, and let the doctor who cures you be higher than those whom you cure, and rub his arms twice or three times, then gently remove the member above it in a moderate way, because when it is too tight or small, it cannot be cured; and then rub the doctor with the palm of his left hand on the vein for a while, so that the vein swells and can be felt; then moisten the doctor with the flame of a small lamp oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein where he is to cure, that the vein does not hurt him and does not make him angry.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if he has surgery for the first time, it is good; but if not, then begin again a little bit further along that line or above the wound, where the skin is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the skin is swollen and the patient hopes for a cure, let him rest for one or two days and do not bind his arm: perhaps there will be an abscess; do not enter or bathe, but begin again the treatment if it pleases you; and if the hole is small, or the wound slightly infected so that he does not feel much pain from it, then set fire to it properly right up to the edge of the wound; and work a little surgery, so that the skin is swollen. For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the skin swollen, do not begin again with the treatment, and put a little oil on it, for it softens the course of the blood in that place where the oil is; and thus administer the oil to each wound as you treat them to stop the flow of blood; and if he sneezes or coughs, then becomes very anxious, so that the oil comes out with the water; and then put oil on it again.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faiches ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance come with the healing of the basilica: so put your hand on, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So then you must not place anything above what we have said, for in a short time from the artery; but he II makes an incision dry to harden the place, and then he treats it with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each pain according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the pain.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the pain is black, let it out until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it out until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for those who are flat and foreign, and have the need to extract the pain, that they make a larger wound and let the flames be large; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable to heal them little by little and often, and let it heal crossing, not piercing; and this method of healing is saved from the decay of the pain and the tangling of the nerves, and is better than the healing of the long one does not heal wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose heart needs cooling, it is necessary to give wet bread in grape juice; if he is heated, then give III or IV times or if he has a cold complexion, give him wet bread before the meal with muscade syrup, or with honey aromatic syrup with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he has a fever at the meal after the exit of blood, then it is necessary that he smell broth of lamb and fragrant syrup and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up a arm, and eats other times, it is necessary that when he is weakened by great heat, he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who needs to vent his arms after the first meal, and he has a strong wind, so he heals seven hours after the first meal, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who needs to be healed elsewhere, if he should be healed two days in a row or three times.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has a fever within his body that warms him up, and it brings about fever; if in order to extract a large quantity, and to open the chest so much that he spits up food; then you should treat all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on his pulse when he heals, lest death come from spitting up blood; and this happening many times, when the person is neglected; and it is not good to separate the arm, and to make the chest open again, and press firmly; nor if it is bent, that he stretches his arm carefully, for that would be wrong; but let him heal the second time; or you point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that has been frozen by the opening of the vein comes out, and put a little string soaked in water on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has escaped, let it go and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is subsiding.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity demands that the blood be drained a second time, let it be done in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that emanates from the arm is located at the site of the vein at the base of the neck because it is composed of complex veins.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the manner of this vein is such that the patient holds his hand in hot water until the pulse is red; then let it move slightly so that the vein appears clearly, then make the incision through the middle, neither wide nor long; and let it be cut well near the joint of the hand, and so keep the hand in hot water, and leave the blood to run in the water, as long as you have enough of it; and if it is bleeding, do not re-boil the hand, for we put it into a warmer state than into a cold one; and the incision of this vein is more preserved than all other veins, since it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The medicine of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it is done: draw out the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein has gone, if it is seen; and when it is healed on one side, and chopped all over, do not cut too much, because the nerves are all exposed, and then put the hand back in hot water, so that it does not stick to the wound, and cannot be taken out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and wax on it to hold it tightly together, and do this for each limb.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for the left hand is good for mouse disease, and do the same as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The treatment for the heel is good for all kinds of diseases of the feet, as well as diseases of the leg, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is that the patient puts some foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it stops, and lays above the joint of the foot; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and over the foot goes much rain; heal then or more wide rain, or at the ankle, which moves less.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the joints that are dislocated, and heal it across as well as up; and let the fire go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get out of it, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if you heal it the first time, start the second time above a little bit, because the leg is salty; do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the other leg equal.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle, and its pain reaches the thigh, when it is for a chill.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its pain is such that the patient should enter or exit by bending the leg, and removing it from the ankle with IIII twists, for otherwise the nerve will not open; and if it opens, then you must move it in all ways that you can, and cross it; and it is better that you cut it, because the leg line is raised, and it is very re-bent at many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not open it, so that the rain of the leg does not open or close on the foot, and goes to the small side, and guards against the curse; and make it run as much as you can from the chill, and then take off the bandage, and put cotton on it and hold it fast; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	The wands of suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Are made of horns, or bone, or glass; and ventilation is done in two ways: either by hurting and drawing blood, or not hurting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this ventilation which is not hurting is done in XIIII parts of the trunk, so that one is all at the top of the head; and others are under the chin; and II under the shoulders; and the windpipe emmi the II arms; and the windpipes emmi the II legs; and the windpipes emmi the II ankles; and ventilation does not treat a bleed, unless there are small veins scattered in the chest, and for this it does not matter if it is all fire or no fire, in any disease that comes from over-eating, until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Et s'il est nécessaire de maladie, ou par habitude, si nous les traitons toutes les heures pendant le mois, ou à la fin, et au milieu et à chaque fois ; car il y a ceux qui, lorsqu'ils ont besoin de ventiler, ont un poids sur leur tête ; et ceux qui sont tels que, lorsqu'ils boivent, ils ont une dilatation et des rougeurs sur leur visage, leur tête et leur cou, et une obscurité dans leurs yeux ; et ceux qui boivent une goutte de sang dans leur bouche, et ont perdu la langue, et aspirent le sang ; et s'il y a ceux qui rêvent, et voient à cause d'un manque de sang et de nausée et de mort et de choses semblables.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and even if it is mid-month, we order them to ventilate after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The medicine of the muscovy duck... that comes with hair, and does not come until all the blood is gone; and this vaporization is in place of the medicine of the head, and does not come unless it is for those of cold complexions who use it or who have chattering, since this can do a lot of harm; and for this it only comes with the evening, when using it, or with those who have head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured of it often become bewildered, and for this the suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the doubt of bewilderment.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The vaporization of the neck is in place of the cure of the head and the temple, and for this it does well to squeeze it a little, because if it holds too tightly, it becomes bewildered or stomachache or elsewhere.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The windings of the ribs at the collar cause pain in the head, and also blindness and headaches, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and are in place of the sanctity of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the doctor that he press his hand so as not to hurt the artery, and not to cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings at the mouth cause disease in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and they are in place of the sanctity of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the arms cause as much pain as three veins in the arms, because they draw blood from these large veins; and command the doctor that he not cut too deeply, for their veins are naked and he may hurt the arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back so it draws out the fundament and the disease from the inside, and it must be big and made of rawhide, because it has to be good at milking; and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break, and would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs open so they can draw blood from the whole body, and they are effective against old pains in the knees, ankles, and the bladder, and they remove the flowers; and they are located at the level of the second ribs and second ankles, but they weaken the body after long use, and bring about early death in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction cup is that you should first make it empty, and then quickly suck it, and then firmly place it, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and inflamed spot, and the pain of the blood; then take off the suction cup, and be careful with the position of the body parts, because there are some that have very tender skin, and are easily injured: so it is necessary to make a small cut once only, and then make deep wounds, and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if he has a large rectum, he should strike it twice: the first time to soften the path of blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if his rectum is very thick, he should strike it a third time; and when we want to extract the blood little by little, we should only squeeze once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to extract blood, we should start often; and if the rectum is thick, we should press it gently, and the end should be that the curds are extracted suddenly, and cover him who has a thick and hard skin, and who has been burned, that you grease the openings of the suction cups with oil that opens and dissolves: if it is in the autumn, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil; and if it is in spring, with nettle oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar oil.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is cold and excessive, take oil of almonds or myrrh, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who has a sore neck and is wide, there is no need to put oil on it, but it must be washed after the windification with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if one has moisture, if it dries up with this [remedy], or with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And if one has cold excesses, they shall arise with old wine, or water of sage, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things; and it is not good to take a steam before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after windification, but when it is necessary to be windified, as soon as it is possible to be windified, while it is windified.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who are coleric, and their heat is too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that they drink cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuce in the shade, and similar foods; and drink small amounts, and eat moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor too new, and small amounts of food, and birds and pigeons, and on the day when there is wind, they must drink more than they eat; and it is necessary to give some people triple or musk before or after wind, to warm their principal limbs; and mild their heat, but it only suits those who are cold.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The compresses that are not painful are those placed on the liver, and on the kidney, and podagra, and on the belly, and the ribs, and the hips; for this member does not suffer to be pricked on the joints, but it is only done to attract blood from one limb to another, just as we place them on the breasts when the child is not well; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, just as we place them on the belly and the ribs to lessen the limb; and to relieve the pain, if there has been an operation or a stone has fallen out, it relieves by its attractive virtue, perhaps the operation, or takes away the stone from its place; and in this way it is done when they are placed on the liver and on the kidney when there is wind, and these compresses are emptied only for the purpose of sucking as much as possible; and they are never combined together, nor does plain water ever suce them, unless perhaps in the disease of pleurisy, and in this way they are filled with hot water or water in which herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup is administered to fire as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup is to be two hands wide and half a palm deep, and it should have one hole in the center about the size of a needle, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member; and in the middle a rod of wood or iron, for the grip of a hand, and there shall be large and small ones according to the illness and age of those who take them; because the suction cups of children are different from those of old men, and from those of thin people from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should put this suction cup on the member: take the hand grip of wax or linen, and place it at the edge of the suction cup over the rod that is in the middle of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then one puts it on the member, and the two are on the hole that we have said, so that when one pulls, there goes the vapor, and one removes the suction cup; and one takes the hand grip again as before, and renews it often, if you need to do so.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the tube that has been opened because of pleurisy, there is no water, nor a windpipe or opening, and it is only opened when it is plain with water and placed on the limb so little; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	The tube that has been opened because of pleurisy is without water, nor a windpipe or opening, and it is only opened when it is plain with water and placed on the limb so little; and this is its form: Do not put ventouses in limbs where they are small, as in lips and teeth, and similar things; and in the legs of horses, if they are two or three years old, and others that seem like them; and the quality of using them is that when you find tubes that are in sweet water without danger, take them; put them into a bowl of sweet water, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs; then make the incision from the back and put the tube on it, then when they are clear, and dry, if it is possible to put a ventouse on it, put it, for that is worth much after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Se ceu non, si leve le leu d'aisil, et puis d'aigue, mout bien, et puis l'espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille i drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchis; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu'il soit estenchis; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu'elles s'aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If not, then lift up the head thus, and then by water very well, and then press it; and if the head is too high after the heart of the swine, so soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, as long as the swine is stifled; and if the swine is multiplied, so put on vitriolic powder, or gall, and similar things, as long as it is stifled; or you put on half a peeled pea, and leave them as they sear at the head, so they will stop now; and if you need more, so take other swines.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	Chapters on fractures are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are useful for restoring dislocations and reducing fractures.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know then, dear son, that the wise men have often poured this chapter on fractures onto paper, and neither in any old books nor in any letters have they read it; and for this reason the science has been lost in our land, because I never found one good book on it; and I do not know it except by learning from the ancient books, of which I have studied much so that I have treated the science and by experience and by the custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the tools that are used, as I did in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting that we say or prologue of this book the sums of speech and the chapters where reason places his understanding, and delay on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when break or dislocation or twists or hurt comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hurry to save the sick person from part and other, if nothing else will do, for example if the corset is weak, or too often; and mild drinks too often, that is to say, cold drinks, horse and deer skin, and do not drink wine, or mild grass drinks, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt about an abscess being hot, or about expansion of matter in the member; so return the disease to its original rule which it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce a thick viscosity, like cooked grain in water, and rice, and eggs, and pies made from vegetables, and cakes, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with a thick nutrition, the breaking will be prevented and earlier.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot well heal or join the members together according to their nature, nor those which are too soft, like the bones of small children; but let them mend with large joints which ache and join the member together, as they were before; and do not at all remove the work, and for this it is necessary to nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breakers are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is different from the break of the knee, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the root, and another that is caused by cutting, as if with the blade of a feather to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that makes a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes back in place; and is recognized the break of the bone because the limb is twisted and open well from the side, and pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or deformity on the edge, and the patient does not feel much pain, unless there is a fracture, but it may have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but put on the medicine that comes after, and then restrain it now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that goes in the arvol, and there are the II parts separated, it is now necessary to put them at a point evenly, so that the chaus come first; and if the chaus come together, let him leave any day, as long as the apostemes are calmed down; then put it evenly with respect to the mues that you can easily and carefully put on, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of that one where there are pieces; then restrain it, as it is necessary here after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and there are the II parts, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or two strings, or a string and your hand; put the member according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the member are mended, then take away by all means the additions in their places with respect to the mues that you can, and keep that by your work no lesion or pain comes to the patient; and join together well the II bones of the os according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the sound is good to the hand if it seems to you that it should not be well: if it is well dried, and do not strain it too much, press it not so as those who make it come by their ovraige aposteme hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in order, so chastise well the sick person that he does not move it, neither in waking nor in sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and guard well that the member be so secure that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain, it should be in order, and the member should be put in such a position that it does not feel any pain; and guard well that it is put rightly, so that no twistedness comes when it is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, as arms and legs and hands: it is necessary to wrap them in thin linen and soft cloth; and those that are large, as thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap them with a broad and sturdy cord, for the broad cords embrace all the large member and squeeze it tightly from all sides so that there is no gap; then untie them lightly, III or IV times according to the length of the member, and hold one end in your hand, then go up above the fracture and loosen it slightly, so that the fracture moves away a little; then soften the cord slightly and slightly, until you have squeezed a great deal of blood from the place below the fracture, then take another cord, and wrap it tightly again on the fractured part; then go back to the place below the fracture and squeeze it lightly, not too hard or too lightly, as we said in the first line above; then put between the cords linen or cloth, until they are all even, then tie them together tightly, and then put your well-made splints on top of them, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or an ulcer, if you put something soothing on it, and let it rest for a few days; then draw out on your finger, and be of half a thin piece of linden wood, or of a piece of palm tree, or be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And if there is an abscess or ulcer, put something soothing on it, and let it rest for a few days; then draw out with your fingers, and be of half a thin piece of linden wood, or of a piece of palm tree, or be according to this figure: But it is necessary that the nail that you put on the break should be slightly thicker and larger than the others; and also be as far away from the limb as necessary in size; then draw on the nails as you did in the first lieure, then tie a thread to them, as you did in the first lieure on the break; the tighter it is, the better; and it is necessary that the thread is not too thick or too thin, and be of linen thread; for if the thread is too thick, like those foolish people who make their lieures with rope threads of linen, which is a great error, because the lieure cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it is only necessary that there be between each nail half an inch of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is cut by the nails of stars after extraction from their limbs, then put a pad of linen or another cloth so that he does not scar.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the seam is broken, I will tell the cure for this after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not fit to extract stars from all the members the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it does not fit to put stars in them but after 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess, hot sometimes; and here is the way of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and this is that you take flour that stays on the sides of the mill, and confound it with good amount of egg, and put this confección, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster which restores the fracture to many dispositions, and most of all to women and small children, for it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Other methods of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and torments: take honey, aniseed, onion, assafeite, gum arabic, and mugwort, 5; myrrh and aloe, 5; alchechick 8; and make a powder of them, and mix it with egg yolk from eggs; the mixture should be warm, for this plaster is good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Other ways to plaster against torments: take mugwort and vismarine, 5; myrrh and aloe, 7; acacia, 6; and armatic resin, 10, grind it well, and mix it with egg yolk or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other ways to plaster against joints and bones that are out of place and relieve pain suddenly, and the size changes due to the fracture: take a new lamb, soak it in water and oil, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cists do not cure, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess, and for properly treating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make an ointment that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and leaves of plantain, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for healing broken bones and for reducing the remaining swelling of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wormwood, chamomile, violets, flour of ash, a part of each; grind them together and confer with wine, and the limbs are warmed, confer with water and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make an ointment that is more effective than the first one, in case of a persistent abscess before healing the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of wormwood, flax seed, plantain, melilot, and stinging nettle, and violet and chamomile flowers, each part; grind them together, and confer with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken member to restore it except a cerott made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, as mirrors and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster that is good for wounds and pain: take mugwart and chamomile of the field, or feathers of owl, and vasal, and straw evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster and lay it on him.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let him dislodge a little later, and take care that the patient feels no pain, or that his bone does not move from its place; if pain comes to its place, or pruritus, or restlessness, or swelling, hurry up and dislodge it, and dip the sponge in water, and raise the member, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is at ease; then let him rest for an hour, then put on a dry cloth, wet with spring water or oil of roses, and tie it on a nut, so that you are sure of an abscess; and then continue to dislodge slightly, a little plaster, and do not squeeze it as hard as before; and to subtlety until he is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is swollen and red and painful, I have taken away all of it; and you must plaster and bind, if it returns, as you did at first to make it even.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb at all of what we have said, if it is not bound up until after three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for more than twenty days, according to what can be seen, until the break becomes tight and approaches the join of the arm on the bone; then restrain it more than before, and make the meat fat, as I said before; and if you see that it is drying up more than it needs, then wash it every day with hot water, and let it dry a little; by this work therefore cut off the bad tissue at the joint, and carefully remove what is wrong, so that the limb is straight again: this is painful, and if it is painful and fearful, and I see no other thing to do than to let it go and do it rightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are several ways of breaking, and there are different shapes and causes; for it has breaks that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collarbone is completely broken up to where it has dislocated the bone, so much as it does with the hatchet or ax; and for this is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	For the sword breaks the bone from above without piercing it, and is called  "absolute" break; and there are wounds of these great and small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a striking inside, or an edge or collar of stone, or falling onto stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a partial break, which comes close to the membrane that is dislocated from the bone, or which is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that has entered the bone as fine as an eyebrow, and is a small fracture, and so it is called this break "capillaire"; and if the wound is made or by hitting a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and thus a piece of bone enters the mouth, and the head of the cheek is broken as the blacksmith does when he strikes on the cauldron; If it goes between the stones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if there is more than one cheek that has moistened the bone, as the head of a child; and there are all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are broken off, like the stars; and I will talk about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and by the investigation at tents, and by the char corrupted that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is caused by the fact that when the bone is uncovered, if you rub up on it, then open the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the break, be careful as to the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of reason, extension, paleness, fever, and hairs standing on end, and redness, and other similar things in many conditions, then it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a potentially dangerous accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must break the bone before the fourth day at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then you must break the bone before the seventh day at most, so that the tissue surrounding the bone is not corrupted, and the accident that we have mentioned comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes only to the membrane that covers the skull, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part in this way: and it is that you press the head of the patient, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and because the blood comes at the uncovering of the bone, or abscesses, help him with whatever is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet towels soaked in oil; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calmed, and are sure about the coming of blood; then begin to break the bone, and this is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you cut the narrow end in front, and this is its shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I put another way of breaking larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have many different taillemens, some short and others long, and some pointed and some of iron; and in working lightly, do not scuffle the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce it inside, so that you bring taillemens with barres, not too finely so that they do not go through the bone's neck, and must be above the tip a margin or circle, so that it does not pass the tip through the bone; and you have to have more, so that each comes in its place of the end of the bone, so that you have barres for all test; and this is the form of the three ways of barres:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce inside the bone is that you put the bar in front of the bone and twist it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the bar a little further away, and so do all around, and then chop the incisions the space of the bone which is between the teeth, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools that you have like tweezers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the cerebellum or the syfac.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	Et when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if you believe that you have removed the sharp edge of the bone from all other instruments resembling an incisors, but it is necessary that it be softer and more delicate than the other incisors; and if it does not remain attached to small bones or scales, if it breaks off lightly on the instruments; then cure the wound with tar and oils as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way to cauterize is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and press it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears; and when you have discovered that part, you will place the tip of this lens-shaped incision there, from which it gets its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then forge with a small mallet above, so that you lightly hit the bone all around, and be well guarded by the cloth that is dezos; if it is caught on the bone, then gently forge the bone, for the bone well feels harm, and no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce just to the cloth, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover again this asperity, and shave off the scales with a fine razor that you must have various quantities, to adapt in each one the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have more than one razor, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and delicate cuts, you must consider the patient's skin tone; this is something that has not been answered by those who have studied this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, then you should place a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, soaked in oil and put it on the wound; then take another cloth double-layered or triple-layered, soaked in wine and oil and put it over the first cloth; and do so more lightly than you can, so that you don't aggravate the wound, then wrap it up and don't strip it off until the abscess is completely healed; then remove it, and administer medicines as roots of herbs, and flour of fennel, and incense powder, and aniseed, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it immediately without any stinging; and be careful that the wound stays clean, so you don't leave it with any filth, nor let anybowels assemble over the wound because when bowels gather over the wound of the skullcap, if they get torn and burst, it will cause a great deal of harm to the patient; because when you put something sharp on the wound, if it burns above it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, so that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if there is any doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackening does not come except because of the medicine that has been put on, which has virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and make it into a ointment and apply it to the wound; then cure it in the way that seems right to you until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	I tell you that a time is never broken between the two bones above, or one alone, for they are two; and those bones are cartilaginous, and do not break unless they bend or twist, and then heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then you should drive your little finger or pertus (a kind of bone) from the neck, and make it equal to the break with your little finger and at the back, until the neck returns to its natural shape; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if he breaks at the top of the neck, and cannot come to his place, if you believe that you should put it equal to the head of a small ray.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if he breaks in two places, do the other way, and hurry to restore the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess is calm, then bind at the top of the neck with linen bandages, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind the other with the other, if he breaks; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that there is no restoration unless one softens the bandages and changes them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that is right, but it is necessary that the bandages be wet with linen and mead, and dust of corn; then let the bandage rest, until the bone is hard and the cartilage has healed.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never bottle up goose feathers in the place of tents, and if there is a wind on it, and hold the broken one, and blow on the sickness among them, or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come while you are working, so that you put a cotton ball wet with oil on it, or a little patch of dyakylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come, so put an plaster on it from afar, of flour of sisarment, and powder of incense, mixed with alum of egg whites, then put it on light poultices, and do not tie the bandage; and if the dislocation of the tendon is small, and it is broken into little pieces, so extract them with suitable tools for that, then cut the tendon, and the cure of things that are injured by char, and souding, as you put plasters and oils suitable for that; and if there is no pain within the tendon, so cure the tents, and put a piece of cloth, until he is well.
de la routure de la mandibule	from the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the fracture is not too far off center, and it is not too badly shattered except for being a little crooked inside, then one should gently move it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, you should stick your index finger into the mouth of the patient from the right hand; and if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, stick your index finger from the left hand inside gently, and make it even, and do the same with the other hand from the outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is on the right side in II places, then it is necessary that you bring together the two ends so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the inside comes from a rupture, then they should extract it with a gold or silver wire or silk thread; then put the damaged jaw on a double cloth, and put a long and wide piece of leather that is even over the jaw, and tie it to the mandible with a knot you can easily make, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, if you delay it for three days, and then put back what has been changed; and place plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with a lot of ash or flour of millet, after which you have taken off the kerite; and place on the other light plaster, and if the plaster stings, and the disposition of the sick does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times are healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, if you administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take a piece of the bone out; if it is subtle to open the ostium with tools suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, if you widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have broken all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, put on it plaster suitable for this, to dry it out, as long as it is healed.
de la forcele	forcele
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force of the blow breaks it several times before, in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three ways: or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the overture is when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds up the shoulder that is broken with force; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or tangling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	Et s'il a besoin de plus grande étendue, alors mets une lance ronde de tissu, ou de laine, et soit gros selon ta nécessité; et l'étend, et le serre, et arrache la lance à ta main, de sorte que tu mettes en place la rupture, comme il convient.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm out at the end, so that it comes off completely, then let the patient lie down on his back, and put the shoulder under a cushion, and have someone bend the shoulder backwards, and press the shoulder blade down, until the bone comes loose.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on both sides, and if you find it difficult to split it, then cut it with a saw; and take care not to damage the bone, and if the break is near one of the joints that you have; but put away this joint as an instrument for keeping the wound closed:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and appears like a spoon, and is not a nail, and is also wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has II chisels, if you see them, one is wide and the other is narrow, like the split in the wound that you made when you broke the bone; and when you are sure about the abscess being hot, if the wound splits a lot, and you doubt about the abscess being hot, then cover the wound with cloth and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you soak it in oil, vinegar, and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if hot abscesses come, if you wrap it in oil, vinegar, and wine, and put it on. The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no fracture, is that you put plaster on the bone with powder from the mill and ash of wood, and put light strips on top, and tie a thin spine around it if you need to; then take a very thick strip one palm wide, then put double cloth on top of the strips, and plaster them; then take a thin stake three fingers wide and long, and wrap it tightly around that strip, so that the head of the strip is hanging; and put the stake over the break, and turn the strip back onto the neck, and tie the spine to the bone; and you remove each part when it gets loose, and when you see that the strip holds firmly in place, and you clearly see that the stake does not move around the bone, then you release it every day, and when the bond relaxes, if it tightens again; and make the sick person lie on his back, and put a small spine around the spine to lift the shoulder joint up; if you support the arm at the neck, and do not let any accident happen, unless there is a fracture, for 20 days; then start the plastering again, if you see that it is needed, and hold it and let it heal; and it heals in about 28 days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone comes forward, and there is no opening of the wound, then do as we have said in the breaking of the mandible to soothe an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the jaw
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The jaw bone is never broken in the middle, but this happens sometimes; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the opening, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no support, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the cheeks with the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lie on his back, and you place him between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and gently put them into place in all ways as you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then wrap him in plasters and seal them on top of a thin piece of wood, or other light thing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the bone, so that it does not move; and turn the ligature around to the back, and tighten it up, and unfasten it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if he needs to be loosened for corruption or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, do it quickly, and loosen him, and remove the plaster, and treat it in the way of cures; then wrap the plaster back on, and tighten it up until he is well.
de la brisure des costes	of breaking the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It is known that the rib breaker does not come from below the chest and back, but from within, and it does not bend much because they are stiff; and it feels right on the examination.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restore them so that you make the break even, as is appropriate.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster, and tie it with a strap if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib break is inward, then the patient feels great pain and stabbing, as if he were crying, because the bone rubs against the membrane; it makes him faint and vomit a lot of blood, and this is very damaging to health, and the old ones have put up with great trouble.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if for those who serve that it is appropriate to administer meat that swells the belly, so that the break goes out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, for hot poultices to come if it is not yet come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let it be cool.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we should put cups on the spot to draw off form, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups will not attract the excesses to the spot for the purpose of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the spot with another moist thing in oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the place equal, then it is cured of the plague, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear the bone that sticks out, there is doubt about the patient, then you should split the loin at the spot of the broken rib, and put a tool there to keep it away from the medicine; and then one must trim the bone, and draw it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is big, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise, if they are placed on tarpaulins soaked in oil, and placed on top; and cure while the place is healing that needs an abscess, and sit gently on the costa where it is, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes that breaks the bones of the neck, and no sooner does it happen; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it has come to any person, and you can know if he will be healed or not, if you see that his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and you cannot move them or stretch them, and when you stick a needle in him, then feel the pulse.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is deadly in many dispositions, and if he mutates and feels well when they are extracted and does not feel it, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the disease is healed, if you put the cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if it seems similar, this comes to the back of the neck, and you must know whether it is healthy or not, if its muscles are relaxed, and if the accident that happened to him is in his hands, and on his back there is no will for wind and excretion; and when he is sobered on his stomach, there is no will for excretion.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sobered on its back and it tries to get up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: do not try to work on it in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, this is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you treat him if he has an abscess, put oil or butter on it, as long as he is calm; then put on one of the poultices, and bandage it, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is separated, if necessary cover it with wool; and bind the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, to a stitch, then dress it with ointment carrying char, until it is healthy; and if the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the cow", if you hold your cup in your left hand, and put the plaster on it and put the stempel on top, if you need it; then tighten it, and if there are any bones separated, if necessary, push them together, and bind the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	the break in the leg of the horse
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	there was a little break in the leg of the horse, and if there was one, there would not be much pain at the top; and it bends, and inclines towards the ground, and causes great pain to the animal in that place, and swells up where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting-right is such that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its form; and if the break is at the top joint, then make that break equal, as long as it remains in its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it tilts inward, then make the patient stand on his stomach, as long as the setting-right of that break has been arranged for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made that break equal, then put on the plaster, and then put a board of wood or of plank on it, and draw the break out, so that it does not move; and fix the joint with pins at the sides, as long as the length is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And order the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come up, then do not scratch them, as long as those abscesses are calmed down, and put on that which we have mentioned above; and then return to the setting-right, and hold it as necessary, if there is no bad accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	the dislocation of the shoulder is that which is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then we should restore it according to one of the two ways: one is that you take a strong staff, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	and the two shoulders are tied together, and they are raised up, and he cuts the patient on a table; then he lays his arm down on the beam, so that it comes to rest, and has a piece of wood taken off; then he puts one end on any heavy object or his ministers extend it downward; then he makes the broken joint equal with his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	and the other way is that the patient is laid on his back, and his hand is tied to his neck; then he orders his ministers that one holds what is on top of the break to his hands, and the others hold fast to all the limbs, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too strong, then tighten the thread around the break, and along the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the shoulder blade, then you should put the thread around the joint tightly, and along the break; and if the break is on one side of the joint, then you should tie it with a loose knot, without tension, until the break is even with the joint, and then tighten it, if necessary; and in all this work, be careful not to cause pain.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscess comes, then do not extract it until seven days have passed, and put a poultice on the break, then assemble the arm with the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and wrap the cloth around, and extract on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in the right position, if nothing hinders it, or if the bone does not break.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a lever, and put on the break a wider and stronger bar than the others, and have between each bar two spaces, and let each bar be so large that it goes over the break III spaces from each part; then pull on the bars, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the break, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the bars and the pulling, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the aposteme warm, so leave it tied until seven days, as we have said; then look at each of the three days when the rash does not come out and go to the place, or the healing cannot come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If done correctly, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If such an accident occurs, if no other accident happens within three or more days, and the patient sleeps on their back, with their hands on their stomach; then tie the shoulder with one piece of equal wool, and examine each hour during the day or at night, to see if the shape of the limb does not move or become looser; if it responds to medicine, and give the food we have described in a previous section, in such a way that the food is in the first layer; and when it begins to improve, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is usual that the shoulder and leg should be reset after forty days of all; and then it should be removed and bath and medicines of ointments administered to adjust it again.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if it is tight and stuck, it takes a day or two to separate.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one small and one large; the small is that which leads to the wrist, and the large is that which points towards the elbow, so that sometimes the large foscile breaks by itself, or the small, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the healing is light and good; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when it is broken together with the other.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small foscile is broken, then it is sufficient to extend it lightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if only the large foscile is broken, then it is necessary to stretch it more strongly; and extend it on one knee, and turn the wrist of the hand on its side higher than the other two knees, and the small fingers lower than the other two, and let the patient cross his arm over himself, and a minister's arm in front of him higher than his own arm, that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the two ministers' arms to the affected part on their side, or on their lap, and another minister's arm under them.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he should put the mirror flat, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, each one should be put in its place, and if there is any that does not hold fast, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do this on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is an injury with the fracture, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there come abscesses, so I cover them with a cloth made of rosin oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and I cover them from above gently, until the abscesses are calm.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then cover the bone with cerott, and I put the plaster of the powder from the mill with much alum, for I put the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be close together, and one more open than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in several dispositions: whether the fracture is in one bone or in two; and draw them up more closely than elsewhere, and always less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the plaster; and let the cloths that are on the fracture be soft and wet, and let not be hard nor rough; and let the thread, from which it is drawn, be of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And keep the limb and the ligature for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you dunk the member in hot water until this itching is calmed; and let the member not be strained to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again with extraction, and if the ligature is softened and the bone broken, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the member cannot be moved because it is too stiff, then you must soften it a little and leave it for several days until the rigor is gone, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not remove the ligature until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or, let him hold his hands by his neck, and make his necks equal, and guard against movement and stirring, and lie on his back; and know that this healer is healed in thirty days or twenty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on our two sides there are few breaks, and there comes but a little pain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or painful, so that the patient cries out, and sits upright equally before him; then he lays his hand on a spread cloth, and spreads the broken bones, and makes them equal, as they are well joined; and lays the plaster and bandages, if there comes an abscess, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of space; and let it be wrapped up in one draping of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks within the parchedens between the belly of the plant, make a rope of drapels, and instruct the patient that he strangle it to his broken plant; and then extract it with a long rope, and his steel of curd is as great as the plant of the hand, and extract it, if so it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the back, if it is convenient that you put a steel on, and another dislocated in the plant so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks at one of the two, if it is pulled out, then make it even, as it should be; and pull it with the plant, and if you see that one puts a small straight steel to raise the break, so that it does not move; and if the break is on the other two, as in the index or one of the others, make it even, and tie them together holding them tight, so they do not move, or you put them on a steel, as if a pouchet; and take care with the restoration and proper position of the aposteme, and help those who come after, as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	from the chest's wound
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The ribs of the chest are often bruised, and it is clearly seen when they turn in front and behind; and the healing is done if they are tied above and below thebruise.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister his ligature to its equal part; and it is when the bruise has entered into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the bruise is close to the root of the chest, so be one of the ligatures towards the knuckle, and the other ligatures below thebruise.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee, so be one of the ligatures towards the knee, and the other ligatures below thebruise; then put the hammer the bone according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster, and the ligatures, since there is no pain.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be soothed then return to your work and your cure; the time is right in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, let it be soothed then return to your work and your cure; the time is right in this way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	Et s'il arrive, s'il tombe, et retient ce qui est venu, s'il arrive comme nous l'avons souvent dit; et s'il y a des morceaux d'os qu'il tient, s'il peut, s'il ne peut pas, s'il faut le faire voler, et le tirer fort; et le guérir comme nous l'avons dit, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And if he falls, and holds what has come, if it arrives as we have often said; and if there are pieces of bone that he holds, if he can, if he cannot, if he has to break the place, and pull hard; and heal him as we have said, until he is healed. And never is the belly injured in such a way that one puts pads on it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in such a restoration made, the patient does not become ill.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the belly is restored in 24 hours, or less or more, according to the diversity of tempers.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	I understand that in the knee joint there may be a slight crack, but it often leaks many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, there is only a crack, or a dent, and if there is a hole, and if there is no pain, and this hurts less.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the repair is that one put even what is long in two, as much as it can be held; then apply the ointment and put a round bandage on it, if you need it, and tighten it as we have said in other breakages, such as a hot burn and another injury; put on each accident whatever belongs to it, until he is well.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	I understand that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; it has all the same fractures as the arm, and the repairs are also the same. If both bones break together, the leg will twist on itself.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his small bone is broken, then turn him around.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if his big bone is broken, then feel the pain and see it clearly; and turn away.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then bring it out, and make it even, and tie the joints evenly; but nonetheless, his fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and align it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two hair braids that purple the leg on one side and the other, and are long at the leg from the ankle up; then wrap them both around above and below, and tie them in the middle, and so it cannot move either to the right or to the left, and so is good; and no one administer two braids of long hair, and if it's red, and put the leg to keep it from moving, and properly done this on the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; then cure as long as it is well.
de la brisure des os dou piet	about the fracture of bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture at all, but at the foot there is sometimes a fracture and in some cases only a crack, and in many cases it is only a break.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture in the foot, and you see these bones protrude one above the other, so that the person can barely stand on the ground, like they want to walk, then now put your foot on their side, where the bones are raised, then press them until they go back into their places; then apply the plaster and cover it, and put a small tray of two flat boards at the front of the foot, then tie it to the foot with strips, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three days or four have passed, if the swelling has gone down, because you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there is any of the two broken, if you restore them, as we have said to the hands of the man; then put on the broken one a stone according to its length of the two, and let it be a little wider, then fasten at its base that which I have said, and strain forward; and if there are II or III, or more, broken, put on each of the two a stone according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen drape, and strain out the slush at the base of the foot; and let it be while it is on the top of the slush far from the foot, so that he shades it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about the other breakages, as soon as we have said; and heal each accident as it should be healed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the arm bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's natural neck is broken, if she is made to sit enlarged, then lean her to the back part, and be held behind; then fill the nature of the illness with cotton, and put in it as big as I stand; then take off the woman, and lift up her back little by little, and then cut the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the neck with the stand; and when she wants to urinate, if she cuts the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back again, and do so for seven days or more: she will be healed, and you shall see. Then take a bladder of lamb, and tie a rope around the navel, and pour all the bladder into nature; then blow into the rope, forming until the bladder is inside: nature will then heal the break; then fill it with cotton, and let it be like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	Et when the bone of the arm is broken, or of the woman, so that it returns as we have said about the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and use to it, and hears my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means many things to the right way of restoration: hear it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vagina, when it is broken, take a goose neck and pour into the vagina; then wrap with a cloth, and leave for III days or longer, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	To him who has a break with a wound, especially if it is great, as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, let it be healed now, so that the wounds that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, if the vitriol remains, then you don't have anything else, then start to restore the break in this same hour, or if it is a morning wound, then if the abscesses don't come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses come, if you don't restore it until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calmed down, and you don't touch them on the third day or the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is exposed on the side that has been cut, then you must put it at a slight angle with your hands, gently and little by little.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not aligned so that your hands are equal in length, then take this iron instrument, which has seven or eight inches of length, and make it wide according to the quantity of the wound; and for this one is skilled in the mire that it takes III or IV, according to what it needs in each cure of a broken limb; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member with your work, and be sharp in front, and thick in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the bent head be placed on top of the highest point of the bone; and it should be stretched once, as long as it returns, and even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must knock the head of the bone until the instrument has the power to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together, as we have said, using a suitable instrument, either an incision or a file, within your power; then remove that which is stuck in the bone with roughness and small scrapes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been put back together, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is in its place, then soak the wound with red wine and let it sit properly; and do not put on the wound wax or any other oil where there is oil, lest it cause corruption and putrefaction; then apply plaster when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself well in mind that the wound should not be constricted with the break; and many times this has happened, and it has brought about death or corrupting the patient sometimes; and the extractions are softer and milder than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is bad or large and you doubt that good accidents will come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it does not suit you to put on plasters; but wrap, instead of plasters, hard wraps, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days to enter Bowen in the wound, if it is what you have put up all win, and I put healing ointments, as ointment tetrafarmasion and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fixed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the Bowen runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it is a day passing, and he cannot fix but comes together Bowen, his bones, because there are little pieces of bone that come out of place, so you must mend the wound with a patch, and all these wrong pieces that come out cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if there is a fistula coming to light, or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the jaw is broken, and opened on the side of the member, as the jaw of the cheek or shoulder, and other large members, let it not be pulled out, for many times death comes, but leave it to putrefy; perhaps after XX days or XXX, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The bruses that come from سودرة
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	come again after the health of the rupture, especially when it is near the joint, and an ugly thing is to see the figure of the member; and perhaps cannot make the members do their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if we are fresh: if you administer sticky medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcacollus, acacia, and similar ones, so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine of aloes or with a lot of ash or with mustard; and put them on the knot in piles, and bind them well, and do not remove them in hand days; and then loosen it, and start another one, as long as the knots are hard; or you hold it on a piece of leather well made; for the property of leather is that it hardens all swelling on the members; and if the knot has already become hardened, it is necessary to cut it off, and let it be apparent; or you take it to any barber, as long as it is hardened, and cure it until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after imprisonment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the weak and fine limbs remain due to various causes: either because he was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bands, and could not bring the member into position; or because of a lot of inflammation; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because he had little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until there is an increase of blood in him; and give him bath, and provide joy and rest; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts the great nourishment, and dampens it often with warm water, until the nourishment goes to the member; and come back to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two damaged limbs after surgery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after healing, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, however, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that the member must be broken anew, and many such fools have done this in our land; these practices are blamed, and great harm and perhaps death result; yet, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is good that they be boiled in warm water, or soft herbs are cooked, as fern leaves of whale blubber, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and the salve made with a mild ointment, such as well-made hydronium, and you take the musk of whale blubber, and confound it with lard or oil of sesame seed, and make a salve; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of coles, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the neck bent by constantly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement in each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the stiffness is great and hard, as in stone, it must be opened by the iron, somewhat lightly, with a gentle incision; and put a covering and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it can be brought back without hurting.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, and the limbs increase in swelling, and by chance he is put back into place at his own pace; for then spams and other pains often come; however, when this happens, the sick person must be made well, then leave it, until the abscesses are calm; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it slightly, and heal each member as the disease comes;
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chaplets of dislocations of the shoulder joint just up to the foot.
des mandibules	the mandible
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And let the mandible be dislocated little by little, and the dislocation of both is according to two ways: either they are a little bone-broken from their places, and a little softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the loin, and stop the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is little, so return by them several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, so that you reset it quickly, and do not tarry at all; and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and pour some medicine from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, so that the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be away, to make it even; and order the patient that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he marks the met to be equal, as long as it regains its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And he brings it back with care, especially if both jaws are together, and by hot water and oil, as gently as possible; do not delay bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back in equal measure, and the mouth of the sick person closes well with mild softener, if placed on drapings wetted with a paste made of oil and wax, then let it lie gently; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows so that he does not move from side to side or make any effort to improve, but eat lightly, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed; and then drink and eat as desired, and do not worry about opening the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and usual heat come, and by chance a solution of the stomach, and by chance vomit of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times dies he who has it, in nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	cannot be dislocated from within the jaw over time and from the back of the tongue, and is dislocated several times to the side; and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the sick person lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put the plaster and bandage on it, and bind it, and instruct the patient that he should rest as long as he is not well; and in this way is also reset the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	I understand that the shoulder can dislocate in three ways: either it comes out of its socket; or out of the chest; perhaps out of the top, which is bad; and never out of the back, nor into the neck; and many times it comes out of the socket towards the arm, but at those who have little strength, it happens that they do not notice anything, and go on their way; and those who have enough strength, they notice a little bit, and come back to their normal state.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	Sometimes there was percussion or breaking in men; and the shoulder was hot from an abscess, and they thought it had dislocated.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary therefore that you test it, until you are sure of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tocier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaleee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tocier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift up the hand of the sick person above, then put on gloves off the arm, and push the joint up with force in place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it above, then put it back; so come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said above, in the hands of days after, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and provide soothing and relaxing vapors, as an infusion of althea and fenugreek and melilote in water, and be administered; then let the patient lie on his back, and remove the shoulder brace a little from one side, not too soft or too hard, then put the mirror on the heel of the foot on the stand, and gently lift up the shoulder with care, and pull the hand of the patient; and other ministers wipe the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns all at once, and if you do it in this way: it is that you make a man present who is more than the patient; and let him stand on his back, and bottle up the shoulder from the brace of the patient, and lift up the brace above, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient downward towards his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then with him put something heavy, so that the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And let him put on also in another way: and is it stuck a long splinter in the earth, from which the shoulder is also reason as a pistol, and is not too thick or too light; then is put out to the lou malade, but that he has drapels suet over, and the malaied is standing on the long stick of the fuse; then is extended his hand down another side forming, and the jointure will return to its place permanently; and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a splinter from the arms of great and IIII fingers wide, which has the head reont for perfectly enter in asselle according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	And then put it on the top of the long splinter suet drapels, so that the fuse does not hurt the lou malade, then put it in asselle the lou malade; and extends his arms up the long stick, and puts the ajutoire on the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a peg of a shelf wide, and let the hands down, and let the body hang from another part: the jointure will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in any way, it is necessary that you put on the shoulder an equal piece of wool, then place the plaster prepared from powder from the mill, with incense and oil of olive, all over the shoulder and armpit, and then remove the shoulder as if dislocating it, and tie it back to the plaster, and embrace the hand around the neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck for a little while, until the members are comfortable, because he will heal faster; and then suck after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and has not become soft, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or some other cause, it is necessary that you apply the cauterization three times, as it is put before or with the paste of the cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it slides after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm forward, then know that the nerves in the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never been properly set in place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation that is around the neck and shoulders, or behind, so it is made by impact, stretching of hands, and I place it in another location; and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the cure comes greasiness to the member, and delayed motion, then use the patient many times, as long as that greasiness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the neck is dislocated to the ends, and returns to the ends; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most of all in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly set, for it can be seen and felt well; and desolate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the sound one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses are cut as they should, for if the abscesses are cut, then it would be painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be reset from all sides at all, especially when it is behind; this one hurts more than the others, and often leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is so, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend its hand with your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and its hands turn in towards the back according to the neck at the center, away and back, and press the joint into its sockets together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and proud of the root of the palm foot that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, then administer a strong extension; and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and they dip them in water, so that he does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide; and when you see the joint joined to his hand, then oile it with any oil to soften the joint, then put the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in its place, then lay it on dry plaster with sheep's fat, and strain it together, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, then recommence the plastering and bonding and leave it for a few days, as long as it is firmly fixed; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels cold after the joint has been moved, and the joint moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a thin layer of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for a day and a night, then make the bone, and let it enter or bathe; and when it sweats, rub the joint quickly, then put the wool back on, and then enter or bathe; and do this II times or III, until it is healed; and if you see, then put on a piece of wet sheep's skin that has been warmed with butter, and stretch it over; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand is reversed, and the return is lighter than that of other joints However, it must be returned to its place urgently during movement so that the joint does not move, or a hot abscess may develop.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you bring it back, put the injured hand on a table, and extend its fingers, and make them equal so that its palm is facing the joint, and keep them extended until it returns to its place However, it is necessary for you to check if it is well placed; then put the back of the hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the back of the hand of the patient on a table, and make him extend his fingers so that his palm faces the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If she comes back now, it is well; if not, if the extraction of pus-filled abscesses leaves her in this state, then she will continue to feel pain.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it and you cannot set the joint after a few days, then the joint will remain twisted; nor does there exist any remedy for the patient except to extract by means of a delicate cautery, or perhaps there is no other remedy than to cut off the nerve or artery by a delicate cautery, and perhaps there is no other remedy. Do you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries? If so, then he should be operated on immediately; if not, he will die.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have described; then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then remove it and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he can't move it well, and there is no crack, then the warm water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two joints in the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	If there is no dislocation of the two joints in the hand at either end, nor on the back of the palm or on the belly; then they are joined again, and press down the dislocation toward the pockets until it comes back, then hold the knuckle of the joint, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it there for a day, and then make it even that day; and if necessary, let it rest, so as to move it again, and tie it up; and do this often, until it is tight, and do likewise, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and likewise, if it is dislocated from another end.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Dou desaluement de l'eschinee dou dos.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, or several are dislocated, if there is no cure, for the patient will quickly die.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs that it is are that the expulsions jump without will, cannot be held, and often a member becomes soft, or the two legs or the two arms or one; and often the eschinee mutates in four parts; that which mutates to the rear is called "gilbositez": if there is no cure for it, or no improvement, for all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting down or percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of treatment with big words did not do any good at all; but I have simplified them according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	Je dis que en la gilbosité que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre formant
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	I say that in the giddyenness that comes before the pit, there is no help or cure; and also what comes straight on both sides, and cannot be cured except that which comes properly from behind, as I have said; and it is that the patient lies flat on his back in an even position, and has the strain taken away from him so that he does not bleed; then put a hot coal at the head resting on the ground, and another between the feet, and tie a rope around the patient's shoulders, and another between the knees, and ankle bones; and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other between the feet, among the two coals; and they are well secured, the coal as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine resting on the ground, until he recovers.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Et est that you stick II torches to the head of the patient with an arm long, and between the torch II others, and have between each torch, above and below, a palm of space long; and have in each torch I perforation, or the twist corre, and let the torch firmly in the ground so that it does not move; and between each II torches have II turning torches because the bond turns, and have in II twists II small torches of a palm long, to turn the twist; and then he binds the bond that is among the hands at the twist towards the head, and the other bond towards the torch with the other twist, and each helper twists his bond on all the bond, and the master puts the needle even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, so put on dried plaster with much blood-root, and then the stumps, and then the stake of a tablet of III quarters long, that by propering the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then bind with a bond as we have said, and use the patient with subtle fasting until he is healthy; and if anything comes at the end of health, so administer medicines softening and soothing, with the stake that we have said before; and never give one piece of limestone, and never does the appearance come in the rear spine of the back, and take care that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, for he should not have presumption: by adventure might come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	I understand that hip and shoulder dislocations occur only in specific ways, unlike other joints, and that the hip joint has four dislocation directions: internal and external, front and back, with the internal direction being the most critical.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations within is that when we join the injured leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and the patient's knees are higher than the healthy ones, and the patient cannot double his knee when he stands; and it is this distance that is swollen with an abscess, because the hip joint comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those to whom it happens in back is that this accident is opposite to these in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those to whom it happens in front are that their leg is well arranged according to the proportions; however, they cannot double their knee without pain, and when they are made to walk, they cannot go forward, and they hold their urine back, and their ankels swell, and when they walk, they go on their heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the hip joint is soft, and the thigh bone is in its place between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And those who have this appearance of dislocation if they do not move it, and this leg is more bent than the other, and the hip joint is soft, and the thigh bone is in its place between the ribs. Remind them of this appearance of dislocation if they do not heal quickly, according to their condition, for there is no cure; and it is not right that he should be confident.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those whose dislocation is recent, and it is of the four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset the joint, and turn it inside out and outside in, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary that you prepare the minister very strongly, and support the leg very firmly with two hands, or with a bandage whatever it may be tied to the knee; and extend another minister his hand above and below in such a way that he presses his hands against his knees, then tie him by a strap across the chest; and extend them all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground all at once, and remain still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to treat his appearance when the dislocations are at rest, as we will say, that you put the patient on his back with care, then put the bandage on the root of the groin, and the strap that is away from the angle, then extend the bandage upwards towards the angle, and towards the force; then grasp the arms of the minister, and embrace the large strap of the groin of the patient, and extend it away in this way: if it returns to its place now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Et si tu ne peux pas serrer ainsi comme nous avons dit, alors il convient que tu lices les deux pieds du malade ensemble d'un fort lien souef sur les deux talons, et sur les deux genoux, et soit la jambe malade étendue de deux côtés plus que l'autre; puis soit pendu au haut d'une poutre, et soit sur le sol deux bras longs; puis commande à un ministre qu'il embrasse la tête de la cuisse, et soient autres ministres pendans avec le malade, qui embrassent forment la cuisse, car le jointure revient maintenant hospitalement.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And if the dislocations are away, then lay the patient down as we have said in that which has gibbosity, and extrude the bandage properly on the leg which is disabled, and also on the foot; then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a torch between the legs of the disabled person toward his back; and plant wet drapes around, so that it does not burn the patient, then extend each minister away from him, and let the patient put his hand in equal position to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on .ie a table, and press it in as we have said in the gibosity, and place the patient on the right side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are forward, if it is necessary to extend the leg of the patient in bed, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror so that its pain is above the sore knee, then press with the other hand, and turn it sideways towards the foot.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are on the side, if it is not necessary to extend the leg of the patient in bed, nor to lift him up from the ground, but rather that he should be placed on his back as if he were lying on his stomach; and be on his face, and the limb be extended as we have said above, and press on the joint at the table; and it will be done when the leg is extended and they are even; then set the splint, and put the plaster, and stretch it with a bandage, so that the leg does not move; and rest for three or four days, then take off the splint, and make him walk as best he can, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward and outward, and behind; and does not dislocate before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his kneecap with your palms, and pull between your two hands, then bend the II ribs of the knee cap together; and others extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg at the knee easily; and put the plaster on, and make him raise his leg at the knee, and join them firmly for III days or IIII, then let it go; and do not work on the patient's going away, until the members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in their place, give a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are neither dislocated nor completely shifted, and inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and lean forward to the part where it has been shifted: one should gently bend it with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from the top, you should make the patient lie down right side up, and support the leg by the thigh; then treat the foot with your hand on your own side, and then do the same with the other side, and then extend it upwards, and blow hard on the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, by blowing and treating the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, begin again with the work, for it will return; and if it does not return thus, so make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place the staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie up the sheets so that he does not fall forward; then turn the minister round who is holding the thigh, and others extend the foot equally with their hands or legs, so as to keep it still; then the minister who is holding the dislocated part should hold it in place with his hands, and others support the healthy leg by the shin; then the dislocation will come back all right.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is hard, then put on the plaster and press down on it, and form the strain, and fasten the leg to the foot, and guard the tendons behind the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight; then let it alone for two or three days, and the ties will become soft if the strain remains; then release it on the third day or fourth, and send the sick person away after four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he has not dislocated again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come up, then it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, as long as they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, then it is necessary to extend them smoothly without work, and that is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocations are in no part of the foot's joint, then it is necessary that you make the sick person sit on a level plain or table all straight, and place your foot on what opens from these joints, then press against your foot forming, until he recovers; and when it is even, and there is no opening, then set aside the sole of the foot on a table with II chairs, then form the strain, and let it alone for three days, then release it; and cause him to rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and it needs to be restored, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, do not be ignorant in the art and have not used it long enough, and do not be proud, compassionate, and tardy; use at the beginning things that calm the abscess, and leave the patient to God, unless you see a chance of health; and when you see a chance, now put the member back in place, so that the abscesses come out; and when the member is in place, administer dry things to the abscess, and cure the wound as it should be, with ointments; and if there is a break with dislocation, and small bones are broken, set them, and do what we have said for simple illnesses; and guard yourself from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cost you much according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
