O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine with its whole fulfillment, and I have brought it to an end by means of its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say, "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work by hand is well-known and spread throughout all regions, it is extremely difficult to find a master who can teach it fully, and there is no delay in learning it from the hands of a master except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because this leads to error and vanity, and the intentions are closed, and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I believe that I can add to this life with the order of this doctor according to the way of exposure and statement and abridgment; and come together with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the setting in order of the statement and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with this to mount up in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and connections and separations of nerves, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of the joints, and the movement and rest of the veins, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because, as Hippocrates says, the hand is not without its use, and its work is great, and especially in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that if anyone is unfamiliar with the things mentioned above, he should be sure not to make any mistakes or deceive people; so that I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon both their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scrofula or throat of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in the throat; so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another foolish man who fought with a spear against a young man of the water, and the spear was large; so he took a piece of the bladder with him, and he died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen a man who was called to wrestle, and I saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the spear; and if he were to be tackled, he would surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another wonder that took place in cure of the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break he had a wound; and the wise doctor extracted the break from on top of the wound as it was very healing, and did not leave any scar in the wound, and left it like this. I.e. completely healed; and commanded that he do not remove it at all; and delayed until the leg was completely healed, and his toes came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways that corruption came were confirmed in or member, and I could not cure it; and the corruption did not cease to go from one member to another until all the members were lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another wonder that took place in cure of an abscess that had become chronic and then became inflamed from the evil of his domain.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For le chancre, when it is infected with melancholy humor, it must be touched with iron if not in its proper place so that all that is corrupted may be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into 1.2 divisions: namely, where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show you in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For so that you may keep yourself safe, so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your weapons in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be healed; and remove your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien warns against this advice: "Do not take on the care of a bad illness, lest you are called a foolish doctor."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise from .iij. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medications, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; also, forms of instruments, iron tools for cauterization, and everything necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and sucking up blood and extracting arrows, and similar things; this chapter is also ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it orders the use of a lever until it is tight, and the shape of tools.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work; therefore I will tell you the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and the most subtle responses; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree with it; and I am short of words, for I shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire aid universally to all complexes where there is matter; namely, hot-blooded and dry-blooded complexes.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with material, some agreed and said that cautery is a great aid; and others said the opposite: that cautery does not help in illnesses that arise from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and must not be cured with heat by heat, nor by dryness by dryness; and he who says that cautery does great aid to hot and dry illness that comes in corsi of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found this by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all ways, do not interfere but those who have tried it by long use of the caustic, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and remedies and space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, however, for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the more miraculously will it agree and be in harmony with the caustic.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that a fire caustic mixed together is more efficacious in cures, and of greater goodness than an acrid medicinal caustic.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not forth but to the member which is cool, and does no harm to another member so little.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by way of distance, and bring disease of great healing to the member; and sometimes it makes the patient ill.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not burn except in excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and I apologize for the length of my speech, for I do not want to deprive you of the secret of fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher teaches in his proof: accept it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at certain times, and be performed while praying.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the potential harm caused by a disease comes about with the aid of cauterization; and most importantly, cauterization is for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be delayed until the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, son, as some people believe; because the disease that is cured by cauterization does not come back; and it is served in this way; but it is not the same as what they think, because cauterization is a type of medicine that changes the appearance of the body, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine in terms of quick relief, and for its virtue and nobility.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease will not return according to the appearance of the disease and its location and virtue; and all excesses are gathered in it through the acquisition of meat and similar things; unless cauterization is administered in the place where there is little excess and moisture, as with fire cauterization for pain and similar things, and if that pain does not return, it will not. But it may come about.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why the remedies are called medical derivations, and this is true; but they do not believe that the remedies are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the remedies are medical derivations because when we administered ways of treatment in no disease and they did not work, then we administer the remedy, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Now then, understand that remedies are medical derivations, not because of the intention of the foolish fools.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that remedies made of gold instrument are more effective than those made of iron, and they only mentioned the quality of gold and its high value; They said that the tools of the remedy do not cause pustules, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does; and gold remedies are more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And wherever you heat gold instruments, you do not know when they are heated by the color of gold, and they soon cool down; and if you heat them too much; then put them on fire; and so there is enough hesitation.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter about the head and neck just in case you need to find something easily.
dou cautere olivaire	And for this we use olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	For this we use olive oil cautery on the head, and in the case of a disease called "soda", and due to various humors that descend from the head through the hair, and through the ears, and for many dreams and pains of the teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexie, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the sick person should be purged by a resolutive medicine that cleanses the throat and chest. II.III., according to what the virtues and the ease and the habit of the sick person can endure; and then do again the throat of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his hands between yours, and put your hands on his neck; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between his two eyes; and let your two fingers come together, if he bleeds from his mouth then heat the cautery which is called 'oliver', from which comes this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the ink mark, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning it; then release your hand completely, and watch for the bone to appear, and if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I told you; after that take 1.1 of silk, and put cotton inside it, and put it on the mark, and leave it for 1.3 days; after that put wet cotton in wax; and leave it till it is hot enough to burn the bone; after that cure the wound with a medicine called 'tetrafarmasson' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And say the ancient one, that when the wound opens longer, it purges more; and for this reason let us make it open a little.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one must so loosen the cautery that part of the bone is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one must so loosen the cautery upon it, and push hard enough that humor is released from the bone as much as a woman would put in her fume so that what is within the body comes out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one must heal and strengthen.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases, except in some men where there is a chance of fear; and I think that I should leave it looser; for the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and even when the shoulder joint of the sick man is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterizing seems to me more safe and milder, so I use it in a way that saves and heals.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the chief pain
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head there is a chronic pain that lasts long, then it is necessary to use yeris and pills which are called "cochie", and head purging and oils and poultices; and if one does the cautery that we have said above, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery slightly as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the fire cautery to each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said above, and applying the  "vasselz" cautery where one puts ventouses, and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient feels much more intense pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the corners be made thinner than those with which one cauterizes the hairiness of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and it extends to the oil, and the headache is cleared by medicines that are destructive, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then make cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When the headache is caused by a cold drink, and you remove the peel and cut it in .i. pieces as many times as there are ways of cauterizing, and then apply the temple or where the pain is with a hot cloth so that it can be re-applied to the skin; and when it is reapplied let it lie and tighten well and leave it like this for 10 hours; and then remove it and treat with garlic, leaving the wound like this for 1 or 2 days; and then put cotton in butter until it dries.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment until it is well; and if you see that this is not working, then do what I have written or another treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery if done according to this method: Heat the cauterizer in this way:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "close" because the chief is made in the form of a clo or he has .i. little of curvetting, and in the middle to a small appearance; and put on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little slightly, until half the weight of the cure is burned; and let go your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is distant, and runs abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in the form of string, and put on the place for .iij. days; then I dip the cotton in oil, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all points, and keep away from capping the artery in this headache which is not yet old.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery before mentioned in medicine and of iron does not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery that is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and so sign this on the painful place a line half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and turn it so that you do not cap the artery and do not come to the jaw; and guard against twitching which happens when one chews, and the neck does not move except for twitching and spasms of pain in the artery when it is capped, or capping causes great fear and especially to those who do not know it, and who are students and experienced; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to stop pain when the artery is capped, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that the fire cautery does not help the disease and the patient suffers, cauterize him again with the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the extract of the artery with the cautery that has 17 knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ears comes from cold, and one has applied the soothing medicines and other remedies that we have said in the section on treatment, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the "poins" cautery all around the painful ear, or around both ears where the pain is present, and then moving away from the root of the ear a little bit; and place 10 points around each ear; after that, treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	of the mouth torture
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l'une en la racine de l'oreille, et l'autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l'ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui aperte saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l'oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi loin com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c'est li forme dou cautere:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have set forth above, but it is slightly thinner and the blade should be slightly thicker; after curing the wound as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	Here is the translation of the text:
de litargie	For old farts
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	Here is the translation of the text:
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	Here is the translation of the text:
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	of the cold the head of the patient, then wash it and everything that we have said above; after that, treat the head of the sick person, then make cauterization on each horn, and 1 behind and 1 III in the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the sickness is serious, do 1 IV cauterization on the spine of the back; and let it be until the fire on the horn of the hour is extinguished, and lift your hand; after treating it until it is well, and the cauterizations that are called "oliving" that we have said above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy For the epileptic person, only use fire cauterization if they are flematic, and it is necessary to first wash the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the sickness is great and painful of pulse medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the fire, make him gargle and chew bone meat often; after that, place his head in the middle, and make .i. a cautery as we have said before, and .i. a cautery on his neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, make cauterizations as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the bones, on the spine of the back and neck, and make the cauterization olive according to the way I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, make him .i. a subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, due to melancholy, there are excessive or腐腐 moisture and thick fluid, then make the fire cautery as we have said to the one who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, due to melancholy, there is declining excess of melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him to drink something by which his brain is purified, according to what it is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After taking the head of the sick person; then make 1.i. a tortoiseshell well made, also as 1.i. a circle, put it on the head; and let the sick person sit cross-legged, and be held firmly from all sides; then present the liniment, and add to it honey from old bees; and heat the fire gently, so that he may be able to tolerate it; then empty the circle through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to the sick person each week once with other good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you wish to cauterize him by making many punctures all over the body. This method of cauterization dries up the brain when it is moist; and then cotton soaked in oil, in honey, and in lard is put on.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awoke comes first as eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the sick person purifying water for the head, and guarding against moisture, and making him sweat or bathe many times while fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has ordered to raise his head, and made a cauterization on the head, and made 18 cauterizations on the temples if they have fallen out of place from their roots together, or if one of them has fallen out of place then make it in one; and cover all the cauterization with veins and arteries that are above the curb, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the evaporation of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop him by trying what you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you how to stop the bleeding in the extraction of arteries and in incising, how to cauterize; and never make a cauterization or wound above the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	the two courses of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delez the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and humid superfluities, then he makes the cauterization that I have said at the beginning of the awl descending to the eyes: 1 cauterization on the head, and 18 cauterizations on the temples, and 18 cauterizations where they hatere or cut off the bones; and if it has been necessary, then he makes a small cauterization all over.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the eyes of tears within the hairs
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have done as we said in the division of the chapter, and it does not help, then do him three times the medicine of bitter almonds; after that he takes off the head, and makes a cautery in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and makes three cauteries on the three torments, a little soothed the hair; and guard against the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened with disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery which is called 'olive' is:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that way.iii. cauterizes on the .ii. sore so long as the hair is; and do not let go of the hand except that as much as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	do hair that point oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of this has happened that the hair of the oiled is converted to the pardern, and grasps the oil, and does one cauterize according to 2 ways: namely fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are long and even, then put the patient in your bed; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the palm, and is the beginning of the sign to pull out the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and musk root on the oil, and heat up the fire by which this form is made:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, so that the cure is burned at the place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper recede, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then let your hand down, and leave it like this for .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter as much as the heating is completed; after the cure of ointment as long as he is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on this same middle level, as you did first; and if the hairs have fallen, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not touch the hair with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical cautery of fire is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on parchment the form of the palm leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one ½., and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then in spreading out on the form that you have made like the palm leaf, put on the paper of the hairs; and if the disease is in only 1 oil alone, then operate in 1 also, and if in both, then in each one; and place cotton wet in wax and musk root on the oil; and heat up the fire by which this form is made: When the patient feels the bitter taste of the medicine, he should press ½. times, for he feels the bitter taste as well as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have done this for a long time, take the medicine by your tooth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the cauterization is finished, raise the tooth, and if you see the paper raised also as it was raised by a fire or an incision; and if so, then it is well. But if not, then put medicine on the place again where the medicine has not worked, as long as your hairs are long and even, and your nails cut short; then put cotton wetted in oil on the wound for a little while until the pain goes away, after which heal the wound that is called "dyphenis" and others, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you have to take care of your tooth well by a great deal so that it does not move at all from the medicine in the nails. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then begin again with the medicine on that place which is softened with the paper properly, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is well; and this is the form of the fuel of the mirror:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's teeth are different in size and shape, and according to what it is for you; and do not answer the right way for those whose job is this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	about the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his/her head in your lap; and hold the hair between your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall; then dip cotton wicks in wine or persimmon juice onto oil; heat the cauterizer; and apply it to the hair at the base of the scalp, as if forming a v-shape with the wick: either by viewing, i.e., moving the wick from one side to the other, or by holding it stationary, like an Tent; but nevertheless, the one that is applied to the back of the head must move.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is open, and treat the porosity, and dry it; and if it is closed, then operate, and force the opening; after that, place the cauterizer in a hot form, and keep your hand on the cauterizer at the part above the oil, so that your hands do not go wild; and place the cauterizer in the oil grease, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then begin cauterizing again, and if you have more need of it, leave it .iiij. days; after that, put cotton soaked in oil on the wound, and dry out the healing with as much caution as possible, and within .xl. days after it is healed, put medicine made from corrosive water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what came about in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	There is also one way to cauterize a fistula that no ancient writer mentioned. When you have a fistula, stop the flow of pus and then put in the opening .i. thin wire of gold so that it takes on the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make the quantity of one 3/4 of a pound of mercury; and hold your hand firmly, so that the molten mercury does not run away to its oil; and if you put cotton soaked in oil in a container or pot: the mercury, if it is placed at the opening of the fistula, and left there for a long time, and then taken out with care, will cure very maravillously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have just described, then it is good. If not, then inject a small amount of mercury into the nostril, and bring the fistula to the root of the nose according to what comes about in your own case.
des crevaices en levres	of the crevices in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouth of times have been crevices on the lips that are called "hair", and most commonly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices with the remedy we have spoken of in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it firmly in those crevices as long as it comes out clean; after the cure, apply the salve of cerotion as long as he is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula or at the roots of the teeth, after it has become pus and swollen and turned into a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help: then you must have 1.i. fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you plug or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes up at the root; and do so once or twice, after the cure as we have said, until it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the root and cut out the bone corrumpt, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and that does not help, then put the head of the disease in your healthy mouth; after heat the cautery so that its form will come out as described here after putting a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after fill the mouth of the patient with salive, and let it sit for an hour or more.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are held fast, and the gums are softened and restrained, and the moisture is dried up and corrupted.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is coldness or sight, and the medicine remedies are not effective, then there is a need for cauterization according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in a copper or golden knife; after take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and moisten it with butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully so that it cools down; and do this often until the virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the wool and the cotton are moistened with butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on 1/4 copper or gold, heat it so that the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery should be used if such is the case that you squeeze a piece of iron or bronze, and make it large so that the fire does not enter the mouth of the sick person; afterwards heat the cauterizer, so that its form will come after this, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be more severe the next day or the day after. And it is convenient that the sick person fill his mouth with good butter in the haste of this cauterizer, and then wipe it off quickly; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery out of the root of the tooth that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the ring:
des scrophules	of sores
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when the sores are of pus and cold dampness, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the scalpel that comes after this, and has 1.2 openings for the fumes to rise up from the scalpel on the other side; and place the scalpel hot on the abscess once, or 1.2 times as needed, until it comes to the font of the abscess; and leave it in this state 1.2 days; and place cotton wet with butter on top until the burning is over; then treat the wound with ointments and poultices as long as it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture prevails over the throat and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by giải thuốc nhuận tràng; after which he shall make fire cautery on the root of the throat, and keep you from going further down than the throat, and dare not eat but a little. After he makes .i. another fire cautery on the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and have him lie in such a position that we have described; and cure him at such a place as we have already said until he is well.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the throat are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then he shall make ij cauteries on the root of the throat in his mouth; and another fire cautery between 2 breasts; and let him lie in such a position as we have described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, make fire cautery by piercing all the cauteries that are called "poins" of which the shape is as described in front in the disease of the ears; and let them be pierced up to .xxx., or so. After he makes ij fire cauteries on the jointures according to what has been said before, and let him make li fire cauteries of iii rains according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the cautery is lighter, because you make it.ii. of copper.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, be gentle with the patient on his back and sides; then lift up what is inside the arm pit with your left hand; and if the joint has dislocated, heat the cautery which has .iij. nails there is the shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cautery it until he pierces it up to the coast, and comes to the figure of the cauterization together .iiiij. cauteres; and for this is made cautery with the cautery who has .iij. ners, because the figure of the cauterization are sit cauteres; and are the nervs according to the subtility of a tent and it is the form of the cautery who has .iij. ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	and never is laid on this 1 nerv for there are 6 cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After it put on the cautery and roll with it; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if he is dislocated above, pour out that which is broken, then make cautery on the thick of the cautery clavicle, or many cauterizes in piercing. For the joint is closed, and it is bone of the moisture and he heals the patient.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	For pleurisy, they say that one should make cauterizations with roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the longest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; and moisten it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize. That is, make one cauterization between the nipple and the collarbone, and a few small cauterizations going down slightly into the part that is sore below the beard; and a few cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining behind a little; and one cauterization on the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand tightly, but rather open it widely as when you are smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And no ancient one said that any man should use a fire cauterization resembling a razor, and scrape and put it between the ribs, as long as it comes to the aposteme; and he jumps because of the pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear, and many die now, or a fistula comes which can never be healed.
de la mice	Of mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse that we have said about in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways to treat with fire cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	From which of these three ways is one that you do make the three cauteries, or four, by following according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery as we have said above; and don't press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be so fidgetty on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two turns, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the cautery to where the cut comes from the left, and let the elevation that you feel come according to the cut, according to the length of the back, and let the cautery be according to the width of the back.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, you pour the two turns that are hot, until you can feel the elevation on the other side, and then take the cautery, and so in there will be four. And if you want, cauterize all of it with the three turns. After the cure has been applied for a long time, and this is enough to heal the disease that we have said about before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	for dropsy, there is no cure except by the way that is called "asclepiades". When you treat it according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit him, then you must do .iiij. cauterizations around the boude, and .i. on the stomach, and one on the liver, and .i. on the mouse, and .ij. behind the back on the spine, and .i. on the penis; and let the cauterization be close to the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cauterization uncovered for a long time, and not letting the cure of the sick remain after the cauterization, then healing would hurry, and both the intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key that we have ahead of us; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is hereafter described.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical, and they are pale with yellow skin, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and move your hand away from the cautery without turning it. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellow skin be burned, and the cautery be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the fingernail; and let the cautery be long, one before the knee and the other behind, while the leg is raised; and leave the cauterization in place for a long time without scraping, so that the yellow skin comes off; after which cure the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of residence
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach and in the intestines are exhausted, it cannot be cured by any method; and you see the patient very ill and of great virtue, if so be.i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about here before or cautery of the stomach, to the cautery that circulates; and .iiij. cauteries around the navel slightly to all .i. cautery clavicle, and .ij. cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the wrist, and 1 cautery on each finger, and 2 small cauteries on the stomach of delight, for the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured if so we have said in divisions, and does not benefit, then 1.iii. cauteries on the spine of the back, that which is completely outside of the body cut it little by little in tripling, and 1. cauteries inside the anus. ii. two;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat is not cooked, and we see swelling of the face, then let there be a great cauterization on the stomach, as it has been said above, and another on the liver, and one other on the mouse to all the cautery nailed; and let the cautery remain open for a long time. After care for the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the tissue which is called "thelule"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you work on the "thelule", if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all blazing on the "thelule" coped; and leave it so that your hand comes into contact with the cautery at the root of the "thelule", do this once or twice, and if there is any burning of the "thelule", then cauterize each one as we have said; after the curatives of herbs profitable until they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the "alchatim", it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear surgery or opening, we will tell you in his place, if there comes a disease that cannot be cured except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is a fistula and it is swollen and dripping pus and corrupt moisture, if you make the attempt with a fine needle, and pay attention to the size of the needle that enters, and restart the fire cautery as many times as the quantity of fluid that has entered, and be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and do not make this fire except in the charnel, and think that it is not permanent; after treating the area until it is healed, and if the matter is dried out, know that the injury is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried out, know that the injury has gone three times deeper, and the bone at the bottom is corrupt. And so as one of these that we will tell you in his place.
de la maladie des reins	from kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes with a strong wind and does not respond to women, then you must make a fire cautery on both sides of the kidney using the clavicle-like cauterizer that we have just mentioned; and if we perform the cauterization in the middle, there will be 2 cauterizations in line, and it will be more effective.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and vulnerable to heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then perform a fire cautery in the area behind the bladder, where the hair at the base of the penis is found, and do this on both sides; and let each cautery be as long as one finger; and perform a cautery behind the back, wherever you feel the need; and let the cauteries be claw-shaped according to the shape described above.
de la marris	of the testes
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the testicles are cold and moist, so that they cannot produce sperm, and the flowers are corrupted and delayed in their term; and when they come, they cause great pain: therefore it is necessary to perform three fire cauteries around the testes, as we have said for the bladder, and three behind the back; and let the cauteries be claw-shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the box of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the leg is farther away than the other when it is measured together; and the leathers are found between the departments, so that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip at .i. a semblant cautery, and sign before the leather around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if it is such cauterizes as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make .iij. cauterizes of the great olive, and let the cauterizes be perfect as well; and treat it until it is well.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes into the hip joint, and it is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of large humors with fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery, and the manner of the cautery is according to .iij. manners: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is: that you cauterize on the hip joint .iij. triangulaz cauterizes according to this form, and make it deep and large, and between each cautery leave a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-colored; never do you make a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, if the cauterization at the cautery of the circle that we have just mentioned in the dislocation of the hip: but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the joint be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the manner that we do in sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach until the thigh or leg: and if it comes only to the thigh and leg, then you make .ij. cauterizes there where the patient says the pain is, and .i. cauterize on top of the ankle 2, at the left side a little; and let the cauterizes be scalpel-like, and let the thickness of the joint burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 toes or near the ankle, then cauterize there where he feels the pain 1.ij. points or .iiij. at the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is a craftsman, let him do more; and if the pain comes from the groin toward the thigh, let him do fire cautery with a scalpel or a circular tool, and give him good care in all his cauterizations so that you do not leave him without doing them properly, burning the nerves and the large arteries, and causing great harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who did cauterize on the foot's sole, leaving it so long that the leg was all withered and the toes as well, and the toes were pierced and corrupted; after a solution of the belly which caused death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two places together, do cauterization in each one, according to this method. // And the sages said concerning the hernia cauterization, of which it is the manner, make one such hook and let it be thick at the tip as a thumb nail, or a little less, and let it be between the threads and let it be from one thread to another of the space of a nail; and let the threads be turned over on both sides, and let them also be like nails, and there are 10 such hooks made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and cool down, and then put it on the box of the painful hernia, and let it be turned around on both sides; and let one cauterization be made and leave 10 days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long enough to heal.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its taste, and few who use it; and yet it is a good cautery that can bear it, and lay where it afflicts.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by touching or by impact or by too much evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold material, no one of these appearances is worth of remedies, unless it is that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is fitting that after the patient has voided the filth from his bowels or other appearances, you make him lie down on his back where the pain is, three signs of a line, and in each line 3 remedies.v. remedies or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and it is done at the remedy that is called "poins"; and if you see, do 3 remedies or 4 at the کلید remedy according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Maitres often comes this disease to small children, and the signs of onset are that they seem tight when they stand up, and they fear; and you find in the back spine at the base of the neck and its appearance that comes over the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you have to cure him, if you cauterize with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire is red-hot and equally distributed along the spine; and if you see it, cauterize with a burning fire between the lines or three, and let the points be close together. After this, cure him as we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire to gangrene which is in the nerve tissue.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints comes from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the people properly call "podagra," and when it is of cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterizing in such a way: make the cautery of fire around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When it is necessary to hold on the foot's face, do so with fire cautery for all the feet, each with iii or iv cauteries of olive-colored fire; and if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and they occur many times, each joint with iii or iv cauteries of olive-colored fire; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand too long except for as long as the pain burns.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery we have spoken about in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, do i or ii lines of fire; and if there is still pain in the two, do fire on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the sleeves or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern well the sick person and give medicine. For if you govern well and you make him sweat, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the wound of the surgeon
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes into the grooves, and the balls fall down to the joints and is a new thing, so that when you look at it to cure, it does not hurt him that day; and he uses things that leave your belly, so that the end falls from your belly; after this, let it sit on its back between your hands, and order him to wash his hair as long as the balls are repaired, and bring them to your two hands, and sign of the back of the rupture on the bone with your finger, and make a sign that is like half a circle above the heart; then heat the cautery where this form is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as long as it is white and dry. Then bring the balls to their place; and the minister washes his hand so that he does not turn back; and carefully operate on the patient's legs, and put .i. cussin and .i. sergeant on the legs, and .i. other on the foot which washes its hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again another time until you reach the bone; and be careful that the ball does not escape when you make the cautery; lest you burn it; and lest by this the patient dies, or some other bad thing.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are in vain. And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their measure, and also of grown-ups according to their measure; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the heat is taken away; after this cure other oils until he is healthy, and lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be relaxed for a long time, so that the ball does not escape when he goes to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and continue it for .xl. other days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and beware of too much drinking and eating, and too much eating and drinking; and when he has done this teaching, so is he completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the abdominal rupture
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When abdominal ruptures come in others and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned on the third curve; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the old ones say that he must be cauterized at the cautery at three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first sign is the top of the navel and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another from behind, and with your hand spread it out completely; but the first cauterize is lighter and moves less.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine for it is of no use, then it should be burned with fire called "poins", and be burned according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its virtue, and its position in relation to torments, and its pain. If it heals after the first burn, that is good; but if not, begin again on another burn, for such is the custom, so that you must perform the burns as long as the patient remains ill.
de meselerie	for medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	for medicine
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mess is everywhere sparse; and it loses manifestly, so that you cauterize your patient with these cauterizations we have said above, that is, cauterization in his neck, and two cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the skull, and one more delicate one, and two on the shoulder blades; and two on the ribs, and two on the joints of the hands and feet, and the pits of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are behind the foot, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cauterization on the bone of the hand, or another on the bone of the stomach, or another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I make of a cauterization, the greater help it gives; and know that the patient does not feel the pain of the cauterization as much as healthy people do, because his body is already very corrupted. And let the cauterizations be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the shape of iron. After this, cure him with flour of times with honey and other cures until he is well.
de enfleure	of enfleur
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Here is the translation of the text:
de albaras	I cannot provide a translation for this line as it appears to be a word or phrase from another language that has no direct translation into English or is unclear.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease that is called "albaras" is relieved, and the medicine does not help at all, then make a fire cautery with a very small cauterizing tool, according to the size of the flesh at the cure, until the blotch is osteified, and its color changes; then treat with flour of dates and lentils, with rosewater and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almond juice, each part separately; and mix them together, bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Here is the translation of the text:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore comes to start, and you stop the view, if the fire cautery at the fire cautery which seems a circle, all around the edge of the sore. And all the healers say that one should also make fire cautery in the middle of the sore; and this does not seem good to me, for I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to come about any time; and a more right thing is that it be fire cautered around, at the fire cautery which is called "circle", as we said in many fire cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	the sore that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some one has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays dying or because of the surplus of blood that it makes or because of the age of the illness when it is too old, and there is little blood, or because of the heat of the illness when it is hot, and you see him hasten to die: then cauterize him around with a small fire; after that let it be so. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce him at all the cautery, if the fire cautery is hot of which this form is made:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And hold your hand in the middle of this disease called 'adubelate' as long as the cauterization has penetrated the cure, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels a distance from it in some way so that the course of corruption is chosen. After the treatment until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another disease that is called 'corrodens', and is nothing but a swelling of the members, for it swells them just as fire dries up wood. If you see this disease in its early stages and can apply fire cauterization, then heat the cauterizations carefully, small and large, according to what suits the place where the disease is; after the fire cure on all sides until the corruption is completely burned away, and nothing remains of it, that whatever is corrupted does not become bone. And then leave it for  .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the treatment with ointments generating char, and if after .iij. days health does not come, start again the fire cauterization on what is delayed corrupted. And this swelling is never cured with water medicine treatment instead of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is much more helpful, and I have already spoken about the treatment with water medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of radishes that come from the ground
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mouth of times has come that the piez by natural birth a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a great fault free thing that bleeds the foot. And the cauterize of this disease so are two ways. That is to say cauterize of fire, and cauterize of hot water. Cauterize of fire if that you warm one cauterize well as is a quill of vouteul, and is made of good iron at the measure that it can porpenre the nail from all sides, and that there is subtilz margins; after it put all chaut on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it come to the end of the nail; and he leaves it so 1 2 days as it begins to move corruption; then it makes a plaster of wild mallows crushed with seil, and leaves the plaster on all night, and it pulls off the nails and will be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the wound by charring as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if he is converted by nature the body, and many times come and in hands and em piez, then it is necessary that you bring him cauterize of hot water; and it is on a part way: take a rope of iron or steel, or a quill of vouteul, and put sus lou clou and l'althelul, that is to say porrelz verrues; and put the rope sus so that he porpreigne all around, then I put a little hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the rope comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep path up to the root; and suffer the patient a little the mordication of the hot water an hour; then let it be, and it will be uprooted all its roots. In this way do one after another, until you have emptied all these who are in the body, then cure them of ointments which generate char.
li cure dou trembler	Then cure him of trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	iiij. cauteres or iv. on the spine of the back, i. between each spine; and i. cauterize the feet, and i. on the stomach with olive cautery; so he will tremble, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	the pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No times appear on the body due to excess moisture, or pus-filled boils, which come from corrupt matter. When these first appear, a cauterization should be performed on each head of the boil using a fine firebrand made from mirth wood, which is held in the fire, or from the root of aristeology, or a lenticular cautery. No times should the cauterizations be performed at the beginning when they first appear, following this method, and they will not grow larger, but will be broken up and healed; however, it is necessary that these be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery is severed
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Maitres times the great tumult of blood from the artery that is split in the wound coming to the skin, or the incision of the abscess, or the fire cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very bad thing to be smelled.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case when it has come to one, then you hasten to put your second finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it so much that your blood is calmed by your hand, and no drop comes; then take fire with olive oil, small or large as many as there are, until they are all red; then take a needle, or a long or short one according to the wound and its place, and hold the cautery on this vein where you hold your second finger, and keep the cautery on it until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if by chance your second finger burns when you hold it on the vein, and the cautery goes out, then take quickly another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and be careful that you do not burn your second finger on the vein, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by tightly winding a thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to stop blood; and bind it and stretch it carefully.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a strict restraint of tarps or burning things upon, or other similar things, unless it is of use, do not seek it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mirred nor presented medicine, then put your little finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and firmly stretch it over the wound and over the vein; and do not move him, but keep him moist with cold water often until the sun is frozen and thickens and becomes tight; and make incisions in front of those to whom cauterization and medicine are necessary.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for the scalp
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here we have said in the first chapter all diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the like are necessary; and I have placed this chapter at the beginning, and will go on from here by this middle way for those who seek lighter remedies than those who strive.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, oh man, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauteries, and therefore it is necessary to use more caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to take any foolish actions. For many people come for treatment in this way: if they do so with their disease in such a way that it easily ends in death because of the mischief that comes from their illness and its great evil; then one should be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give you their advice and say: "Wait, I am about to die"; and the disease is difficult. It is not necessary that you grant consent to those who come to you with this manner; but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open without careful thought from those of whom you are certain, and from whom you could have acquired such things; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be converted; and if he helps you to obtain a good reputation, glory, and a lasting memory, then he will help you.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	This is a complex and intricate text that requires careful analysis and interpretation. Here is my best attempt at translating it line-by-line while preserving the original meaning as much as possible:
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is my translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	Here is my translation:
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is my translation:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and because of this I think it is better to relax the work of this chapter in partial treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child where the shoulder was plain with water, and each day the head grew bigger until it could no longer be sustained; and because of so much moisture it seemed that he would die, and this moisture was so gathered around the bone on his syphac, between the collarbone and the bone; and the work is so difficult because the moisture is gathered between the collarbone and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you split open the head with a wide split; and let it be as far away from us as 10 feet, while the moisture runs. And see here the shape of the sputum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscesses are larger, then make two cuts in a cross shape according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is gathered around the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond to you: then you should make three cuts in a certain way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After extracting the rags and powders, put in wine and oil, and leave it so for five days; then release it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head be extracted evenly, and feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you consider the opening of the abscess, and the alignment of the point; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never to the right; and it is never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the abscess opens, and the alignment of the point; for you have the power to do so; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient may die from the eruption of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In regard to treatment, there are several options:
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a person has a disease that is called "catarrah" in the nose or eyes, and the illness is old, and the treatment of medicine does not benefit him, then the second cure is to cauterize with what they cover the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you have covered the sight, let the patient raise his head; after rubbing the place with an ashy cloth until the arteries appear, then extract the patient's neck from all the cloth; then look where the vein runs, and the two sides are next to the ears, and they are open; then sign the sides with a sharp knife, and cut each side with a gouge made of 2 parts. As long as the cut comes up to the bone, and that is done on both sides by the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, pour out the gouge over the artery and cauterize it from above, cutting it also as two sides from a 2-part gouge.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, let it continue to flow upwards without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at the feel, then you must measure the quantity of space of .ij. dos, and then sign with your hand and cut just to the bone; and that which is necessary to put blood out, it is 1.v.c/, and perhaps a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone not to spread pain, if the cope that the abscesses cover do not come out, then drain the wound and bind it, and the cure of the wound until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Here comes the first line:
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient emaciation comes, and the catarrh obtained, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old feverishness and similar things, and is medicated by methods of medicine and all that does not benefit it, then we drain the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hair grow in his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is a little more or less repelled than in some men who are too cold; and if it is repelled, then the patient's collar should be removed from any drapelz, then rub the place with any harsh drap, and raise the place of warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatemile where this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scorch the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then turn it over as many times as there are fingers on each hand; and if the artery is thin, then cut it off with the point of the hook according to the quantity of the 20 fingers. For if it is not cut off, there will be no saving of all things.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Then turn the blood from the 20 fingers until there are 3; and if the artery is large, then bind it with 2 double strong threads of silk, so that porosity does not come before the sudoration of the wound, and go away running from blood; then cut off the surplus between the 2 threads at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with the fire of the cautery up to the bone as soon as the fingers are cut; and this is the work of the cauterizing, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is an aid to end moisture: for what is it that there is more of an aid for moisture?
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill up the place with well-made tents; and when you take them off, let there be medicines of dry things that make them come to birth, and of tents, as much as they are healthy; and if without a cort of the artery so long as you operate, if you employ the leach of vitriol, or extract it by your hand that the sin be stained; and if you have not this present, if you put on the leach your finger so long as the sin continues, and is extracted as it should be; and that which is sore and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the base of this hook-shaped cautery of 20 parts, but let the cutting be well made so that it lasts longer in heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too weak, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the .ij. tools a .i. an adequate amount of space, and then when you have cut through the .ij. leus, and you rub hot over it until it comes to the bone, and seal the vein in the .ij. leus; and they are separated between the .ij. joints because this cautery is not bound on all sides; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	For when the tears of the eyes come from the veins that are above the head of fire, and it does not benefit from medicine that is done, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel like ice; and if they are too weak and moist so that the hair of the paper falls, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the ancient "cure for contusion", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then cut him .iii. slits on the forehead evenly according to its length; and let one of the slits also be as two together all along the forehead up to the nose, and the other two as two on either side behind the ears, and keep from cutting the arteries which are behind the ears; and remove your hand from the jaw's continuation, and let each wound have the quantity of three fingers at its tip.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and put on a piece of sponge and wet it with water from both sides so that the blood is removed, then dip the sponge into salt and place it on either side where this form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision which is on the temple up to the second incision; and peel off all the keratin that is between the two slits up to the bone, then do the same for the other side up to the second incision, and then remove this sponge completely.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you dip in the first slit the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other side, and this form is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And measure the length of the cut towards the horse's back, and the length of the bone, and the thickness until it reaches a medium width. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the hairs until the incision is continuous until the place where it opens from the back, and then do the same in the medium width until the other end; and then extract the blood equally, and express the place for the blood taken; and then put a tent of old cotton into each cut, and put drapes soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and take care that the abscesses do not come; and on the third day release the tie, and introduce a great amount of water plant, and then treat with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	to continue
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	For when there is a constant catarrh with habitude, and you see the hairs thin and fall out, and dimming of vision, and burnt papers; and the hair turns white, and at the head it hurts very much, and the patient sneezes; therefore know that these matters and this catarrh do not come from one vein only, but from many; and such a cure as this is, so is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And so command the patient to re-position his forehead, then make a deep cut along the brow, and another across the broad. . . And begin from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and incise as far as the bone; and keep your hands away from the temples that move when you yawn; and when the bone is exposed, clean all the blood with a sponge, and then wrap it between the . . . lips of the cut and place cotton wicks and linen strips on top; then lay damp cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and keep the wound warm; and when the bone is exposed, if char comes to be born, then treat it with things that dry it out, which cause chara.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 1/2 pound of flower of wheat, and 3/4 pound of kohl, and make an ointment; and apply it to the wounds in order to prevent chara from forming everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the sticking-up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All those who have ears are of the four things: or grain, or beast, or stone of little value, or similar thing as iron; or seed, as peas, beans, and potatoes; or flowing things as water and easily moving and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it chokes in the ear, stone or another kind of thing that does not fit well into the ear, do not put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, pour a little violet oil or seed oil; then let it be extracted; and what is done is to jerk violently, and the nostrils stop when the jerking comes, and place pieces of linen or wool inside the ear; and turn the ear upside down. Many times this cure brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then extract it with a subtle pin, from which this form comes:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pin, it is good; if not, then extract it with a small, double-edged blade; and if it does not come out with that, make a metal ring and squeeze the head of the ring or the opening of the ear very hard, so that it cannot enter with the ring; then try again, for many times it comes out in this way as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, then take glutinous substance where they are, and put some cotton inside; then press the glutinous substance on the stone or whatever it is, and try again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out with any of these things that we have said, then you must cut the ear in such a way that the warm blood comes out, and spasms; and the way to cut it is so that you make the first incision at the base of the head of the shoulder, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then put the head of the shoulder between your hands and turn the ear upside down, and make a small cut in the root of the ear with fat or oil depending; and let the cut be like the moon, as long as you can feel the stone, then cut it carefully, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is corn that has grown, and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer .i. spitamentum tenue subtil selon cette forme :
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And if it is corn that has grown, and it swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer  .i. spitamentum tenue subtil selon cette forme : et amenistre incision de celui grain . Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pièces ; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtils et au succier , si com nos avons dit, si que li extractions soit aligié .
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	So it is necessary that the patient use sneezing with condiments at the beginning of the illness, and dry out the ear with old cotton. And it should be placed on the middle part where the fluid is; if it is not, take maintes pierres according to the length of your finger in a light way, and heat them a little by the fire; and put one into the patient’s ear, and sneeze upon it from the other side, and make another with another stone on top of the ear; and do not cease to make the stone in the stone until all the fluid is gone, and thus it should be; and if you see, take 1 jonc, and bottle one of the ears in the ear, and the other chief take from the fire as long as the more dou jonc is burned; then make another with other jons until all the fluid is gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm, as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large worm that can be felt, administer extraction with pinceaux; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them, as we said in the division and where to treat distillation, and if the cure does not benefit, it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun; if there are no worms, take a fine pin and if they do not appear, take the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And be tight below and wide above. And pour the subtlest chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck the form completely; do this again and again until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, so pierce between the cotton with a pin as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out strongly as we have said, administer distillations which the old ones have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where to treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be tight below and wide above. And use a small, sharp tool to open a hole for distillation; and for pressing the distillation in, there is an instrument of brass, very well made, for sucking, and if you see one, take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the cain, and let the cain be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or evaporated from the ear; and smell the patient's breath, and let the distillation be very hot on the fire, so that it is distilled in the ear, and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ringing in the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No children are born who do not have any piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the ringing in a wound or a chafing in the ear, and this ringing comes sometimes completely into the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and it never happens that there is only one piercing, and the hearing goes away, and the sight is well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes completely, so that it cannot be seen, is a great cure for many disorders, and in this case you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has done all this sputum of which there is this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And so it will be in front and behind all plain, if it does not break the ear; if the operation is a chafing or a corn in the ear, if it holds the pinches subtlety, and cleans it lightly, as long as that chafing is all bone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Et s'il est opilé dans l'oreille, prends .i. un rasoir fin léger et chauffe-le un peu au feu, puis met-le sur le cor de l'oreille. Si tu sens l'opilation dont le patient sent une grêlure à l'ouïe, perce légèrement, et garde que tu ne creves pas les nerfs de l'oreille ; puis mets dans l'oreille une tente selon la largeur du perforé, et l'enduis de suie égyptienne.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is opiled in the ear, take a.i. a fine light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, then put it on the cork of the ear. If you feel the opilation which the patient feels a grating to hear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to cut the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and dampen it with Egyptian suet. Do this for as long as the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and powder it with vitriolic broiling; and if you see the ear running, cover it so that you pull out the tent and move another tent moistened with rosin which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is lifted; then heal it as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If the discharge comes from the ear, dip a sponge and rag in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments which heal the ear discharge that are or are made with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	"And if not peeled, then the fire cautery with the lenticular cautery, and the cautery after incision valour moves; and many times return, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never return."
de la gresle	"from the grewsle"
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	"Many times come in papers things that seem gresle in form and dureness, and for this is called 'grandine', and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper on top and bottom; the ovraiges are these: take care if the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; cut the wide, then scorch each legily, then take it with tweezers, and cover. You do not need to pierce the paper, for this does no harm to the patient; and if it splits, so mend it with thread, and cure as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, for the oignons will soon restore it and cause chafing."
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the earache goes down into the ear towards the part above, then turn the paper over, and the earache is at two pinches, and the paper is pressed on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incising, it does no harm; and when the earache is cut off, let the oil of salt water live there, and cure the place that causes it as long as the patient remains healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is produced in paper webs, and it happens more often in children than in others, and it hurts their eyes; it makes them cry by morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears go to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces, sleep, and their papers are wet where the exinach comes out and covers their eyelashes with oil. And when you squeeze the place between your fingers and feel the exinach coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to use it so that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent like a circle according to the quantity of exinach from each part, and then put it on; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinach is gathered in the middle; and cut with the blade into the moisture, making a split no bigger than a vein is made for opening it; and then clean the skin completely until you come to the exirnach; and in several dispositions the exirnach comes out of the split, according to the shape of a piece of fat that is white.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then an entire piece of sackcloth between your two hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it grows sparse; and be careful not to move in the tear, lest you come all the way to the spine, lest you splatter it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraction does not cause pain in the tearing, then a little more lightly tear it as much as it appears; then remove it as we have said, then moisten the cloth in water and place it in its place, and extract from the bones.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such men crush silk and place it on top to corrupt this moisture that is delayed. Then treat it until it is healthy. And if it comes to the base of the aposteme, then the treatment with oil tempering until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	For the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	"Place the head of the sick person in your lap, then hold the paper of the oil in your left hand; if it bends, it is good; but if not, pour an arrow on all one thread above; and let the hair that grows there be straightened out, and bring the thread up to all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then tear off the paper from the part that has bent, straightening out the hair, counting all the blisters with the thread, from the great ones down to the small ones; then pull out the thread, and wrap the paper in a little cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an eye, as if it were the fist of a mirth; and it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised to all."
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	"And if the part that needs it has a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make on all the blisters above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the great blister down to the small one; and let it be an incision near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the oil into one of the two angles of the corner, then scorch it entirely; then join the two lips together with a thread of very fine wool, and rinse the blood, and let the excess of the threads hang on the two sides for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, because the paper relaxes at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is wet (as the old people say), and it is work without fear;"
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a mold that is as well as the leaf of myrrh, as we have told, to .iiiij. times, desevrez according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take who rises on small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you do not have the ability to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take an needle or he has .i. thread, and the bottled in the figure; and bottle another thread of them great wound, and the second thread of them little, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift up your hand equally, and lift up all the leather on which you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the 2 lips of the wound by sutures, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so appease it with cerot and similar ointments soothing;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there is no time that the hair of the paper has been converted: so it is necessary to use that which we have said about incision; but the suture in one and the other place is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Here is the translation of the text:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	"If it delays, if the bandage is tight, then treat it as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the 2 dogs that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:"
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The ovraiges are such that you squeeze a needle finely, and pour 1 thread of silk fine and细丝; then join the chiefs and tie them together gently, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase 1 other thread of silk briefly, and tie the chiefs with this thread; then put the patient's chief on your own Chief; and let the sun shine so that the ovraige is subtle and small, then bottle the needle into all the chase near the hair root ajusted, and make it pierce through the paper hastily as you pull it up; then draw out the hair until it reaches the chase, and pour in the chase that hair, whether 1 or 2 or more; then remove your hand until the hairs come out of all the chase with the natural hair."
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased, treat it and the hairs do not come with it, so you will pull the chase out to all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes from the pit on top and you see it by the vision of oil; then, if you pull the chase and the thread, and lock in there and leave it there .ij. days or .iij., until the hair is hard in its place and the fur grows up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany with it i long hair from nature, and raise it along with that which you leave, as long as it is stretched out and then let it lie down.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the porriture comes in oil, there are of ii ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment in this is that you open that wound, and separate the lips of it, and put linen cloth inside, and lie there as long as it is well; and you must not use in its cure any things that dry and restrain. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than before; but if you use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the water of rose or bitter ale and linseed are cooked, and olive oil is melted in no oil, and I wrap a tent, and I cure it from that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure, if you take care that it does not harden according to the shape that it had before; and the remedies that we have said are only effective against this disease if it returns according to the shape that it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil which comes out
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease, which is known as "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accidental causes arise from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige is such that you place a double-edged needle, making one edge face right up, so that it pierces 17 degrees of the left lamina, then continues to pierce all 17 degrees of the char, then goes up in a single line to the top of the needle, and finally stops at a single point.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the shape of the paper returns according to what is appropriate for it; if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, turn the paper over, and make 17 cuts or scores on the inside of the paper; and let the chaps of the 17 cuts or scores be at the 17 angles of the incision that you have copied, and let one angle be such that when they are assembled, the shape is like that of a letter with a non-sloped "g" (i.e., a round "G"); then put on the char, according to the quantity that its edges are turned out from the paper, from that which follows the paper, and then join the 17 sides, and sew them with another thread; then treat this disease with soft medicines, and tenting, until it is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, you should make a plain split between the hairs of the paper, and according to what is written above; then remove it between the 19th and 20th leathers of a tent, as I said; and one must perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the master remedies must be equipped at all times how to bring back the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is appropriate for the work and instruments in multiple preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	to remove from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this soudure has come about in such a way that the paper above is souded with oil, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor between the paper and the oil, and lift it up; and spread it with the thin liquid, which should not be too sharp or too rough, so that the oil does not burn the patient with the too sharp liquid; and let your incision, from which you remove what is assembled, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and all that is assembled must be washed in bitter salt water and soft water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil wool wetted with an abundance of egg white; and after three days use of the collar and the things which are souded thus long as it be sane.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the unglues of oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Saiches that the nail is according to .ij. manners: it is nervous and seems to last a day hard syfac, and another which is not at all nervous, but seems to be white congealed moisture, that when one touches iron and cares for pinceures, there can be no man; and both these appearances begin to spread towards the great eye, and grow small and small until it covers the whole vision and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then he opens the eyes; and lift up the paper to your hand, then double the nail at small doubled, and raise it up; then take a needle, and I put 1.poil of horse, or cow, or of bull, and 1.strong thread; and double the needle’s point a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail with the needle, and tie the nail to a thread and raise it up, and peel off from all the nail the skin which remains after the incisions, so that by incision does not come the neck of the tears usually; and never is the nail to be raised completely, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the skin that comes out, so that there is its form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep so that the spatumile does not touch the charnel cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in oil a little sewed, and of the colier made of alum, and leaves it until another day; then cure him of whatever he needs until he is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails cannot enter, this image of the nail with medicine is often cured; and it comes like I have told in the division, and if you cover it, then do this oil from the disease, and take the spittle lightened according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail gently, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all and the root is pressing down, then distill from your mouth into oil made of lime and red ochre and finely ground, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again with this method, as long as it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing against the oil, then dip the finger in it like an apostem, then lap it with milk, and first cure the apostem that is healthy, then begin again as before, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eye hurts in the oil due to great harm, then suspend it with a chain, and dip one part and not all at once, so that tears do not come; then distill into oil of red ochre which is made of lime.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the horse which was born on the apple tree
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	of the horse which was born on the apple tree
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the hair has been removed, then pour the oil of sesame or you have distilled red wine and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton cloth over the oil with care to keep it from spilling; for if he delays at all, and the sun rises on him, and you doubt about cauterizing, then leave the oil and treat the wound with healing medicines; then return to your work until it is healed, and in this way the hair will grow back.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case, it is necessary that you adapt the cure to each oil according to nature; and according to accident, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that the member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	the hair
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	the hair are red and are covered with oil, and take care of the work and weaken the oil every day. It is therefore necessary that you look at the head first: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend the hair from all sides according to your wisdom, and make the strands double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two strands of hair per degree in three courses according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then carefully double the subtle hair, and wash the blood after another hour, as long as you see the removed hair from the oil; and keep the oil from being burned at the tips of the spatulums, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you don't burn the hair; and when you have finished, carefully distil into the oil green and red essence to corrupt what is delayed
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot hold all this together in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and is assured by the heat, then start again according to this way which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of power:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	the fistula of the oil: and if you cure it with fire and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut through the tendon on the aposteme, leaving it where it must die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then resound it with all the instrument where it is the form; and is called "aspre chief", and be made of fire in a chief, and be pointed as a lime, as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And set upon the bone's place that is rotten, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little as you know that corruption is released; and do not do this again, then put back the place of medicinals that dry up.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is solid and the heart is healthy, and the bone of the bow is solid and remains so for a while, and does not renew or swell up, and no bad accident happens to it, you know that it is well; if not, then except for bringing the fistula to light at the nipple according to this form: and is that you uncover from the bone the second time by iron, and by medicines that dry up, and when he is uncovered thus take him away. i.i.f. forth according to this form, and let his iron be at three angles, and his furrow be flattened out jusc'as far as you see it:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then set upon the bone's deliquesce place, and move your hand away from the oil .i. a little, then turn all the forest again until it pierces the bone and feels the pain of the patient through his nose because he holds his hand on his nipple; and then put back the place of medicinals that dry up, as I have taught you, and when the heart is hot and hardens the leus, so goes the matter to the nose; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil's issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are fully grown in all parts, and there is no stirring or rustling thereof, if thou layest the patient down, then hast thou done well; but if thou dost not lay him down, but puttest on him a bandage, so that he feeleth it not, then hast thou done ill; for by this means the hair will grow long and even.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	For the removal of a torn web
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	For the removal of a torn web veiled over the wound, then open it, and comes like paper, as if a grain of resin, and is visible to see; therefore you cover it with a cloth, then take a needle there where it has broken at the root of that part until the top, then stick another needle in this part where the thread doubles from the armier; then make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then tie one end of the thread to the other, and draw it tight, then remove the needle and put oil there wet with unguent; and leaves it as long as the thread pulls on the web veiled, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound with a circle of cloth from any part until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are of good appearance, if he pierces it with a very fine needle that comes perfectly from the oil, and he draws off the moist white pus and washes the hairs, and he dries them up in a short time; then he draws them out until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This appears to be a treatment for an unknown condition, possibly related to oil or aqeuous solutions. It involves applying heat and using a fine needle to pierce the skin, drawing off any pus or excess fluid, and washing with oil. The text also mentions the appearance of the affected area and how to position the patient for treatment.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Our eyes see the appearance of needles in the division, and what is suitable for piercing; if it is done according to health. It is necessary that you place the patient between your hands crosswise, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy oil tightly and firmly; then set the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called 'almagda', or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then set the tip of the instrument on the crown by its thickness on a ray in that clear oil to the part of the smallest tear, and then pour out the instrument which is called 'almagda' well, and turn your hand around so that it pierces into the clear oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the perfect measure of the space that is from the plumule up to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horn-like cloth, and then set the instrument up to where the needle is, and then express one path after another. Now the needle comes out, so you can see the patient and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, and then the needle comes up the second path, set it firmly with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise, remove almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in a little string of gem oil, and leave that oil inside. Then set aside the stopped oil or another dry one soaked in oil and lots of perfume, and bind with healthy oil. We, and those who are of our time, let us put on quickly with abundant perfume.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have too thick hairs, it is necessary that you squeeze the instrument which is called 'alberit', from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so now cut the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep with the scalpel, but make it [the wound] open subtilely, then pour in alum as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the sleeping coming forward, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to its disposition until three days; then remove it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind it again until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, for he will go up quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And so now cut the abscess carefully, and do not go too deep with the scalpel, but make it open subtilely, then pour in alum as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the sleeping coming forward, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to its disposition until three days; then remove it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind it again until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, for he will go up quickly.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And so now cut the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep with the scalpel, but make it open subtilely, then pour in alum as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient the sleeping coming forward, since he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be careful of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to its disposition until three days; then remove it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then bind it again until the seventh day; and it is necessary that you do this during the time of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, for he will go up quickly.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the shapes of gold, so that he who does not know them sees them; and they are of pure brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the chief of these medium subtilities be, and the behind in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the square on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	And no one of these characters appears or is a square on the neck; there are no scorpions at the mouth of it; and if there is any such character that has a fox's color, and if there is a character with good color: In this character, which is good, and not encumbered, let the patient sit between your hands toward the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the needle on the characters, and cut them hard; then take what you please from that which you have placed on the sputum of the subtle agut on one side, until you know that this character is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine. If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine. If there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if the opening is everything but the instruments of subtlety are light, so that nothing stays; and if without you rise up or an abscess, then the cure is such as it should be; and if these are evil abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the sap is dried up and all the pus is drained, then pour in or pour out easily and quickly or wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a tube, and conduct it also; and if you see, then make a close tube, and let the instrument be plain for purging the head; and hold 1 hand to the head to keep it while the oil or any liquid is heated.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder from the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Might there be a disease at the top of the neck that is called "telul," and grows and becomes great enough to be seen with the eye; and because of this, you should chop it at the beginning, and then burn the bone completely, and then apply the fire cautery or medicine; and if one delays to chop it until it is great, if it is hard, of a strange color, poor in feeling: but do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when you chop it once, much harm comes to the patient; and this abscess is touched gently, not with a strange color, and you see that one can completely chop it, if one empties and stops it without fear, and cure it with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is chopped and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continuation come in one of these ovraige cartilages, it profits little, rather than in some men. It therefore comes that when one has a wound in any part, he should look at it carefully; and then bind it up with 2 fingers, then cure it as long as it remains healthy; and if the fingers are separated on either side, you should skin all the parts of their flesh as long as they heal, then join the 2 fingers together again, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood powder, and incense broied; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of a strong kind or another plaster that always sticks, and leave it there until it cracks, then cure it with ointment as long as it remains healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to sew up the wound so that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	The way to sew up the wound so that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the lips; or with thread, as I have told you.
de la char des gencives	The way to sew up the wound so that you gather the solution: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the lips; or with thread, as I have told you.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maitres often naissent on the gums charred, that the old ones call "albulus"; if it is convenient that you hold them with tweezers, and the cope at its root, and let run the bow or the blood; then put over the place vitriolic broied, or other restraining and desiccative powders; and if this char returns after the incision, and often happens, if the cope the second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after cauterization; and these are the forms of the tools to cope.
des sordens	of the remedies
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Of the remedies for toothache: None are assembled in the head of the teeth, between the gums, that are ugly and sharp; and none are black and yellow and rotten, until the corruption comes to the gum, and are the teeth stinky; if it is convenient that you sit the sick person between your hands, and his teeth be in your hand, and pluck out the teeth or the caries that appear, as long as he does not stay; and so do black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are clean; and if one that is to be pulled comes up again at the second day and third, as long as you have them all out; and know that a tooth has need of various shapes of instruments to be pulled out, according to what the operation demonstrates, because the rasor from which one pulls the teeth has other shapes than those from which one pulls between the teeth; and these shapes and others be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is convenient when you cure the tooth of its pain that you delay pulling it as long as you can, because this should not be done at all; for it is a high-priced substance until there is no excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	So then when the patient is constricted by the treatment, it is necessary that you be sure of the tooth that hurts. Many times the pain leaves the patient, and he thinks it is a sound tooth, and he has it treated; and yet the pain does not go away until the tooth has been removed, for we have already tried this on these elders; and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, so that you cut around the tooth with a very sharp scissor at first and then again, until it is well loosened, then tighten the scissors firmly; and let the patient's jaw be in your holy place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After removing the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not fit, then take any of these instruments and put it in from each side slightly, and move it as you did first. And if the space is narrow and filled with bones, then make a cut in the gums gently to pull out the tooth. And it is necessary to work carefully around the gums when pulling out the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the root's badness of the first pains. And be careful that you do not do this as the ignorant elder does, who, by his haste and boldness, often breaks the carriage, and does not manage at all what we have described; but brings about any pain of the great disease by the roots that he holds back, or by the carriage that he breaks, as we have often wanted to; and when the tooth is pulled, if you wash the hole with wine or asparagus and salt; and they run away without stopping until the pain comes again, which often happens, if you employ the hole of vitriol; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains moist when pulled, then put cotton and oil on the place where it hurts; and let them be made inside like a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out of all these tongs, then you must uncover the whole bar until the root, and put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say palache, from which this form is taken:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be far and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, then help with all the tools, from which the forms come later:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument which has .ij. rays, from which this form is taken:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are before in the rationale of the dens, and of this instrument which seems a great tongs, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that most of the instruments from within are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master of wisdom will try by himself his instrument, according to what his work and the disease show him, because there are many diseases where the elder does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the carriage or the other bones, or he rides, then look for the instruments that you need, which I told you, and help with the gestures, so here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be strong and well able to hold the bone, that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then return him to his place with suitable medicines for this person, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, so the resection of all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it seems that the root is after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then cut off; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, which resembles a small pick, and made of iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And wrap the cap and put your hands hard on the tooth, and for what you do not move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, so take a file of this form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the lime with which we make needles; and in the same way the tooth pokes and pokes lightly with the hand every day so that it does not move until it has broken; then at the end, to all razors, and its edge is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, it is necessary to sharpen the hardness as much as possible so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth moves away from its socket
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth moves away from its socket, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on it without causing pain, and you have treated it with restringent medicines, but it still hurts; if you can restrain it with a golden thread, because silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold thread never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any pain on one side, then take the thread and double it between the iij. teeth on that side, and put the nails there, if there are more than iij. teeth, until you have successfully stopped the pain on the other side; then restart the treatment until you reach the part where you have started, and hold the hand gently and carefully, until it does not move at all; and if it relaxes, or the thread comes loose, fasten it again with another thread; if it stays put, it will remain so for a long time, and it is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the iij. healthy teeth and the iij. missing ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and when the tooth chieves, if it returns to its place, again and again, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and suffering should meddle with it, and never make the shape of a tooth out of ossian wood, and put it back in its place where it has fallen short, and fasten it as we have said, and leave it there for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the link of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	There is no time when the link of the tongue comes from nature, so don't wait; or by accident of a seared wound; and the ovations are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and hold his head in your hand, and bring the tongue out; then take the large nerves at the base, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its attachment, and if it is hard or soft, and this is due to a sudden wound, then put the hook on the basis and take the large nerve; and be careful that the cut does not become too perfect, so that the artery remains. And when you have done this, raise the level of rose water and thus, or cold water, and then put the linen on the tongue for a while; and wash each night, so that the link cannot close. And if the blood comes out, then treat it with the lente-root which is good for that; then cure him with other remedies until he is well,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see a dark or hard color, so that the sick person does not smell it, nor touch it, for it is a cancer; and if it declines towards blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour the hook, and make a fine knife out of glass, and cut on either side; and if he comes to you without delay, put him on vitriole broith so long as he is stained, and then return to your ovations until you have taken everything away; then raise the level of ash and silty water, and cure with other remedies until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the glands in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	No one should put his finger in the mouth, which is called "godath", and call it by its proper name. When you heal them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful: if it is an abscess of little size and red color, don't touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron either for the pain of the blood; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will take it away, or it would break by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover, but first look at whether the abscess is hot and calmed down. Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his joints be healthy, and he opens his mouth and puts his fingers between his hands, and presses the tongue with all the instrument, so it is shaped; and it should be of silver or fine gold like our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the scalpel and put it in the amandra, and lift it up higher than you can; and do not tie anything with it, then cover the instrument, so it is shaped, which looks like a force; but nevertheless the head is curved, and one side is above the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron from this or that:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument, then cover it with pliers, so it is shaped:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And so cut from one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the mandrake roots, if you cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the sick with hot water, and sharp and easily, and they run away from blood if it comes, if you gargle the sick with water, or extracts of pomegranates, or leaves of mirth, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then he will cure as long as he is well; and never come in the throat other apostemes than the .ij. mandrake roots, if they are cut exactly like the .ij. mandrake roots.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And so I cut a woman from one side and the other; there was an aphoretic root in her throat, that is to say, a small aphoretic root; and I closed all of her throat very tightly, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which had been stopped up, nor could she drink or eat, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for one day or two; and the aphoretic root was so high that it had been raised 1.2 times by the two passages where it was growing. So I waited a while, and put my finger in one of the passages, then took it out again, and took a large piece of bowels; then I put my finger in the other passage, and pressed her tongue; then I took the root, and cut some of it off, and only let a little blood; and thus the passage was opened up in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting the aphoretic root for a long time; and the aphoretic root grew again, and filled the place which I had emptied out, so that it became very large; then I cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts behind me, and there was only God to thank afterwards.
de l’uve	of wine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the pain returns from the wound, and it is running and far away, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, it is called "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the aposteme chaus are quieted, and they are thin, then you should cut them; and those who are round and gathered, and are not far away; and they are bloody or a reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it. For there is great danger with this disease. So, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, that its blenchor and its longesce, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then put the oncine into the uve, and turn it over, and cover it with .i.ij instruments that I have said in the incision of the .i.ij mandrels. And you should not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; because if you do, it hurts the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .i.ij mandrels, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient has a fear about covering, then you should use an instrument for cauterizing him with a fear. And the way of cauterization is sharp water. And it is that the patient puts his head on your healthy side, and then presses his tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned, where there is cauterization with sharp water, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and in using this instrument's handle, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put your hand on a lock where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the uve; and let the patient lie on his side, so that he spits and the medicine runs from his mouth into it, if it does not go down the throat and the wound; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the uve for half an hour, until you see it heal and the medicine's bites be quieted; and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton is dry on the uve; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and after 3 or 5 days, if you see fit, rinse out the cauterized place with aquae frigida, and cure by gargling until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, or the cauterization only; if it is cured by smoking in this way, take calamus and ysope and oreganum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put all of them or any of them into a 1-liter pot, and put it there easily, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and dip the instrument in the pot as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And of silver or of gold, and be one of the shoulders crushed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises through the vein until the vein is dead; after it begins again often, as the vein dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess, for many things come there; and do not make this but at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a vein and put a hook into the head of the shoulder so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot; because the hook does not cause the vapor to weigh on the mouth, and this is good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it rises to the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so it is necessary that you take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you see the thing; and that which does not open to you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that his food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if this thing comes out by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or .i. a slice of dry bread; and put a thread on it, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, if it swallows, and then draw hard; and if she does not come hard from what we have said, take a plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and raise the head so that the tongue is elevated; and guard that you do not touch the epiglotte, that it does not come down to it or push the bone in; and move it so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he vomits or spits out the thing; if she swallows her, or she spits her out completely.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No time is medicine for the blood, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press it with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, send it to all small nails, or small tweezers that are worth to him. And if he is not worth, take a wet dog's tail, and pour it into the patient's throat, then pour the water of the tail hot, and do this often. And if the patient is very thirsty every day. Then take a full bowl of cold water, and open the mouth, and let him drink, and move his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, so spit it.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then subdue the patient with ash of tansy, at the instrument that I have told you in the smoke of the oven; do this many times, for she will not gargle. And the way of the smoke is that you press a pot or he has charcoal vis, and let the smoke come out through a hole in the middle, and in that hole place the head of the instrument; then pour your smoke, and let the patient put the head of the tube in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to the blood; and the blood will now come, and if it does not come, then restart the smoking by many times; and make the patient thirsty, and drink salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then the doctor's work is that she comes out through this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument should be that you can see the blood, if it is, as when you can see the blood, similar to small tweezers for getting into the throat; and has a shape like a syringe, and has a尖端, so that what he takes, he cannot let go; and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters about abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The chapters on abscesses, according to what is remembered here and there in this book, and are diverse in perforation and in cutting; and they are in .ij. ways, the one being of its own kind, and that which is due to moisture. The second way is because of the joints where they are located. For the abscess at the top of the head is different from that of the base, and the abscess of the charnined leg is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if an abscess is not to be pierced at all, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if it is of such that it must be pierced when it is crut, and does not die according to its completion, as with an abscess that is in a delicz joint; for when an abscess comes from a delicz joint, and one leaves it until it is rotten within, by chance the ligature and nerve of the joint are corrupted, for this is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is of the main limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the main limb; or if it is of the base, if you pierce it so that it dies before digestion is complete, and it comes to be along a fistula, and cannot heal in great terms.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess that is dead according to its completion, which is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the cooling down and sharpensings of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must know that you should make sit the perforation where it is most dependent on the abscess, and at its root; and let the perforation be of the long of the cors, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves, and in all the limbs equal to one another where there is no pleurogie.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	"Those who do not have hair, such as superficial abscesses, should be pierced clearly; and when the abscess is large, and it has a thick wall, and you pierce it, if you do not take out all of the wall in that hour, but take out some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then take out nothing more; do this many times with care, until the wall is all gone; especially if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old people with weak vital forces. For the expectoration does not sometimes come out with the discharge of the wall, so that by chance the patient dies, and you do not know it."
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood runs down from the wound, bring cold water and easily, and wet i.e. a towel, and place it on the running blood by many times. And if the blood runs persistently, bring governance and cure, and the powders that I have said to hand in this book, and if it is or ten of fire, and the leus where the abscesses are are very nervous, let you know that you put on your tents and drapes wet with wine and oil warm; and if it is in estoit, and the leus are charnelous, let you know that you put on drapes wet with water and oil, or with wine and oil cold, until three days, as we have said; and then unstick the abscess and dry and cure, as it should, until he is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this concerns the universal understanding in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one should go before treating abscesses, and here is the paste.
des soros	of sorrows
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	"And the size of the abscesses and the length of time they are left untreated depends on how much moisture they contain. If an abscess contains little moisture, it will be easier to break open; if there is no moisture, as in one I opened at the top of an old woman's head, I found the abscess as hard as a large stone, rough and blistered, and could not break it open; and had I tried to do so, I would have made the wound as deep as a stone. In other cases of abscesses that develop near the ears or at the base of the skull, leave them uncovered for as long as possible until they discharge their pus; then treat them as needed."
des scrophules	"For scrofula (a type of skin disease):"
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Maitres often cut an abscess at the throat and drain it, and place angels [i.e., metal tubes] in them, and none of them come to another part of the body, and they rot, and are joined together with each other. And each scrofula is properly inside its rib; as the new and the abscess at the back of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. Some contain moisture, and some are wicked [i.e., bad] so that they do not wish to obey health. Therefore whenever you see one in good condition on the chest, and its color is like that of the flesh, and it does not move from either side, nor is it attached to the neck or the artery or the conduit, and it is not deeply placed; then you must cut it from above, and skin it from each part, and the twenty lips [i.e., teeth] of the mouth to the chin, if you need them, as we have said in the abscess at the back of the head; and do it slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, nor is it deeply placed so that the hand escapes, and do not look too far ahead, lest you cut something that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the flow of blood, and tighten the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begin to rot. And when the pus has gathered, if there are any small scrofula [i.e., lumps] at the root of the scrofula, then cut them off and skin them. And if there is a large scrofula at the root of the scrofula, it does not matter that you cut that scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double knot, and let it hang by it, without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut all the scrofula, then you must gather the twenty lips  [i.e., teeth] of the wound and sew them together now, without delay because of the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you sew the root of it, and squeeze it hard, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulae that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens; and pierce it in this way, depending on what we have said before, then apply leech  [i.e., leeches] with bloodletting and similar things, so that it does not corrode the one that is delayed by corruption; and when the wound has been well washed, then dress it with ointment while it is healthy.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the slicing of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be removed; and there should be no aid from anyone, for all the veins and the membrane of the disease are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. mandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the membrane, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the suffocation which comes from strangulation does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a knife of two and a half inches wide or with a small one-inch split at the back between the two halves or according to the measure of the split in the flesh, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no chisel, and the vessel is long
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, then split the meat as far as it comes to the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, for there will be none, and then cut the flesh according to what we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the blood vessel that jumps out by the place that has been broken, and by the absence of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed where one doubts strangulation, gather the .ij. lips of the wound from both sides, and the whole joint under the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote growth, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuicasim says that one should not do this as long as the throat is completely stifled, and the patient is deemed to be dying, and the disease spreads.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through the wound, and thus is preserved from death; and
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this, the elder instructed to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in iii days or in iiji.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and put it in her throat, and went to the pomerance.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood flowing from it; and I knew that she had not cut a vein but rather that the flow came from her throat, and the blood flowed out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it as best I could;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the girl was red in the face, and returned to her usual state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I fear there is no hope of recovery from the surgery on the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	is called "gorge hernia", and is a large hernia in a pale color, and is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and are according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or naturally there is no injury.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And this accident happens according to .i. manneres, of which one is similar to fat for us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us from the artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it has fear, and does not come to operate fire only in that which is small, and prove and search in all the intermediary:
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it also as .i. nut grass, and cannot in any way, if the cap, if it does so to us, and treat all of his cap, if there is none:
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well, and heal if necessary, until it is completely healthy.
des nous	Here is the translation of the text:
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to treat it, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And so I will explain the differences between them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is hot and fiery, until the bubbling has passed, and is complete; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new medicine there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains one part of the medicine which is its own skin and starts like a pea and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearance, or fat, or moist, and their colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the cure of the new medicine, you should test and question first all the instrument that is called "entraimissoire", according to what its shape will be or the paste which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way of questioning the abscesses is that you squeeze or more moist water that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has entered the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the instrument for inserting, and take care not to break it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If there is a lot of moisture, what color it is, if it does so as I said in the chapter on abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if there is no moisture after the instrument has been inserted, know that it is greasy, so do so in a cross shape and grasp it with pincers, and gently scorch each side, and beware of the cot where it lies;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if I do not stay, he returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little while, and does not trouble you, then employ the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on something soothing to the abscess, and treat with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if we are very hungry, then count the three fingers of the wound, and treat with this;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound is opposite or on the other side, then hurry and employ the place of vitriol, and let it lie there for .ij. or .iij. days, until the wound oozes blood, and then come back to the copper;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of 3 ways: great and little and small; and there are 3 quarters which are called "albaret", and 1 which is called "breb", and there are 3 ways: great, middle, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	And they are also like the needles used for piercing amulets, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are white are more proven in piercing black pitch to encircle the burrows of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	And they are of 3 ways: great, middle, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the breach.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the intruding instruments are of various sizes, so that you can see here: great, middle, and small; and if there are intruding instruments which have 3 quarters of 3 ways each;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if they have .ii. corbes, and also are of .ii. kinds; and if they have .i. corbe, and one corbe only, and are of .ii. kinds; and all these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these dogs are sharp, and some do not cut better than from one side, and thus they skin the nose, so that it cannot cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these introducers are the needles inserted in many, so that the patient does not lose sight of them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of 3 kinds: great, small, and middle, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and don't use more than one fire but in a place charred, like legs, arms, breasts, shoulders, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and do not make any other instrument small, resembling scorcies of fists, according to this form, so that it does not burn with fire:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and do not place it in any place that heals with a little bloodletting from veins and arteries, and do not do so according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and do not inflame the breasts of certain men when they are getting corrupted, until they seem like breasts of a woman;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and grow slowly and remain, who are to be cured in this way, if it is necessary according to this form of the chapter of this line up to: f.g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then skin the fat, and apply medicine to the wound in laying down cloth, then join together the 19 lips of the wound with sutures, and cure it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and let him suck the milk of the skin, and be moistened by its greatness so as to resemble women, if you do it in 19 ribs from above, with 19 similar cleavages;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of which one is held to the other at the end of the one and of the other, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line up to the line g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then skin the meat that is between the 19th and 20th lips, and remove the fat, and I will instruct you on what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been made entirely, so that the patient does not rest, or for the evacuation of blood, then you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the meat and remaining fat have cured, and then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	the Achilles tendons
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The sores that come from abscesses are handled in the same way as hard scrofula or nodules, and there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line B to line G:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, if you employ cotton wool and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from now on until they are healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles sores, then treat it in the same way as we have described for treating sores, and if the wound is a bowel, then apply the cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery ruptures and the skin is tightened over it, then there are often abscesses and also it comes to the escaped vein and the abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one opens it carefully when it is for the artery, then the abscesses are long enough.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel pain; and when it is for the vein, if it feels like pulling apart; and when it is for the muscle, if it feels like stretching.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cut off this appendix, and most of all when it is dislocated at the armpit and at the jaw and at other joints, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	So then the treatment with iron must be avoided, and that of the one at the top also, and in the one who is swollen with an artery, cut through the skin from above;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the waist as a single piece, and carefully separate the artery from the veins, until it is completely uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then pull out one needle, and make it pierce all the way to the other side, and stretch out the artery on a double thread of 2 threads, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	and then mark the spot that is between the 17th and 18th ties of an intruder as long as there is a tie there, and unbind the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the remedy that causes bowels to move, as long as the bond continues;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat with oil coming from what is causing it, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is located at the base of the neck, so that you hold it by the skin, as far down as you can from the abscess;
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And then pour the ink so that it does not go out of place where you hold it in your hand, and let it pierce, and there is a thread of two, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	And then bind the abscess, as I told you, or with one thread of the two threads to both heads;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	And if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then take another needle with all the ink and pierce it to the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	And then cut off the excess ink, and cut off the surplus of the knot, and leave what remains tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then wrap it with a damp cloth made of wine and oil, then administer the cures of tent and ointment until he is well.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses from the nose
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when coming from the artery and the vein, they come to the nostrils when they are ruptured, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and it is the same color as the color of the heart, and it is in many states without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they are held in place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not fully fixed to the spine, but let go of the cure;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and is muteless on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and the one who is in the joints will not come together with iron: it may happen that there is a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin to the spatulate.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the apostemes are small, if it has one nail, and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then the suspensory holds it in place, and the scorching, then the bone is assembled with stitches to heal until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	large mouths hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No time aviens in bellies and not elsewhere the lulu, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of mushrooms, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and many big ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw .i. home who had .ij. bellies that were more similar to mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were cut short, and ran together moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one to be 16.7 ounces, and the other 14.3 ounces; for in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones,
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	If you take the large spatulum, and are in your presence, then fire cautery comes; for often there is too much movement of blood when sawing, and it escapes without you noticing, so hurry up and cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	And if you see the patient expecting and afraid of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of string, and bind the artel with it as we have said, and leave it for 2 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to tie the string to the artel as long as it copes with the artel, and try through it; and if the roots are thick, so cauterize him himself for the belly, but you can well cauterize half of it,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize him so that he does not recover; then cure the wound and be sure to not cover the pus which is of green color and poor odor and of milk-like taste.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an infected abscess, and I will come to the cure of the scrofula hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has broken out
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	if the appearance of the boil comes out with a fire cautery or a cut of syphillus, and it is on the belly and there are some boils, as would be in other wounds, or of blood that cuts off veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to a rupture of the syrupy matter and an exit from the bowel, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the blood, and this is a light matter without pain, and with various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when you press it to its two sides so that it turns over and returns again, and perhaps so that it gets stuck, and increases more at the entrance to the bath and because of great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without being constrained; and if it is due to blood, then open according to these signs: the large and hard abscesses, and are inserted in accordance with a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, then it is in the back of the throat, and the work if you look at its appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If you must leave the wound untreated. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before about the chapistrel for the artere and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or loins, it is necessary that you command the patient to wet his loins and lie down completely; then signal all around the loins.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then order him to walk slowly between your hands;
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the room where you have signaled;
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then is half of the aposteme placed above all the great hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie a strong thread or strong silk rope firmly and let it be tied up;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then spread out half of the aposteme across the thread, and with your index finger, touch the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find it caught on the thread, and if it comes loose, then touch the intestine at the edge of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, if it takes hold of the hair, and cut off the surplus.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery becomes blocked or damaged, if you cry out loudly, then return to your work and take .ii. needles, and thread them with .ii. fibers, and thread the .ii. needles around what you have pierced so that you made it;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in .iiii lines above the needles, and if you see, cut off the needles, and leave it there until it putrefies, and dig a hole for it;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is soft and putrid, then treat it with the remedy that suits it, and shampoo the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And draw out the blood where you see moisture, then treat the wound of what it touches, and seal it.
dou chancre	the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of the similarities of the sore, and we will tell how it should be operated on by medicines, and how it should be cured with iron; and we say that the sore is inherited in the marrow, and great care must be taken in its cure, and the old man said that when a sore is in the leg or can be cut as a sore that is in the breast, in the pot, and in similar places, it must all be cut off when it is in trouble; and when it is big and old, it should not be approached except to cut it, for I have never known anyone to be cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the duties, when it is in a position to be cut, as we have said, are that you do not purge any time the black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifested repletion, then afaited the bile  i.e., good place for doing the duty; then throw your hair or sore, and the bone from all parts, and the joint from all parts leaving nothing; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze hard at your hand or at anything, and if it comes against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is stopped; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	On gout
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	On gout
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Take the patient by the hand and press the spine towards the lowest part of the back, then use a spatum with two points: cut it into two parts and always make sure it is not so deep that it reaches the intestine when inserted, and does not cause bleeding.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look to see if the gout is running into the intestines: you must cut it with two points on the back of the hand, right next to the knuckle; and if the gout is due to liver disease, cut it on the left side of the fist; and if it's due to mucus, cut it on the right, and do not allow the excess to run into the weak leuch; then regarde si li malaides a la main qui l’a fait venir, et il ne doit mie giter de son poing, pour que la main ne bouge pas, et il est desirable qu’il porte une cotte de mailles: et quant tu fais ta fendure, ne regarde point vers le bas li malaide, car il pourrait se lever, et si tu le vois levier, tu devras le reposer, et s’il est trop leve, tu le feras abaisser, et si li Malaide a la main qui l’a fait venir, il est bon qu’il porte une cotte de mailles;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and lift your hand to all the spatium between the skin and the syphac too as when peeling by a thumb or thumb; and then pierce the syphac until the spatium comes up to the wet outlet, and this is the outlet of the water, and then press it firmly, and pour out this instrument by which this form is: And seems like an silver cane fine, and is of lead or archual light, and has in the part of a small hole; and where it costs on one side, a small hole; and 2 holes on the other side, and 1 hole on the other; and the head is cut as a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the writers use to cut a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	On the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then pour out now on the instrument; empty half or a third, because if you empty more than it is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he shakes his head, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malaide mean, and his poulz; then try the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now by the keur who stops the hole that is on the syphac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this way; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try a little water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not make any fire for a day, and keep away from drinking until there is no delay but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave out some water, so that the cure of the grave or the sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and becomes black from drinking; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	the stopping of the urination
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born with a small foreskin or a foreskin that is not in its place. If it ever comes to pass that he does not pierce it all: then take a very thin piece of skin from the scrotum according to this form: then bind and hold it in place for three or four days, and whenever it wants to urinate, remove the binding so that he can urinate, and then put it back on; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is not enough to open his skin.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	The foreskin should be small, if the skin of the scrotum is very thin according to this form: bind and hold it in place for three or four days, and whenever he wants to urinate, remove the binding so that he can urinate, and then put it back on; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is not enough to open his skin.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of the operation is that the patient lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are turned so that they are as flat as a feather; so that if it pricks in the middle, like it should; and you must guard against the flow of blood, which comes often, and if it comes, stop the bleeding from him who stops the flow of blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come blisters in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly thing; and there are bad and good ones; so that you should squeeze them with one finger, and cut them and clean them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure them with diafinicon until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blister is malignant, of green color and pus, then you should apply fire to it. When you have cut it, and if the blister is in the middle of the penis, and there is part inside the skin and part outside, then you should take the blister that is inside first; and when it has hardened, then cure it from outside. For when you cure it together, unless it is not sure that the root of the penis is not pierced, it will come black and corruption into his penis and where coion; so that you should cover all that is black and corrupted, then put honey and flour on it which is made of pomegranate skin and dates, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	Et s'il est accablé par la fièvre, alors administrer le cautère lunaire selon cette forme: Les cautères ainsi associés aident aux .i. dispositions ensemble: c'est-à-dire au moment de l'apparition de la fièvre et de la corruption; et si le prépuce de la verge est corrompu et retranché, alors il convient que vous fassiez couler ou faire couler du plomb de la verge dans un canal, et que vous fassiez pisser le patient entre les jambes; et quand le pelage s'élève sur la tête de la verge qui arrive à ceux qui n'ont jamais été circoncis, ou il est pour une plaie ou pour un abcès, alors il convient donc que vous l'échauffiez avec un instrument en cheveu, aussi longtemps que les liens soient desserrés et que le prépuce de la verge soit libéré de tous côtés;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Et si c'est une affaire grave à discuter, alors il convient que vous l'échauffiez avec un spatule en fer sur la tête de la verge et du poil; puis desserrez-le bien entre les 2 et mettez une fine toile de lin mouillée dans de l'eau froide, qu'il n'y ait plus de chaleur.
de la circoncision	De la circoncision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a cure for continued ill health if other wounds are present; however, when we perform this operation on infants and children, it is necessary to do so with great skill, and in the most lighthearted way possible, in order to save them.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not teach circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only this one acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the most master and wise men who made circumcision among the Jews, and the strong, and all novel things; so that it is necessary to do this because there are three threads, and by chance if one of them breaks, the other two will hold.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it may come out upside down, and the pain is double, and there is no assurance of the cleaning of the member from the nail; and by accident the nail may break, and ruin the work, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleaning and I want this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mouth-washing that is made to all the thread of the I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, cut it evenly at all angles; but the thread should be well twisted around the hide; and the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you do not tie the thread tightly around the staff, and then put it to sleep in all kinds of ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then place the thread straight between your hands and stretch the forces between your hands or toes so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then hold your hand to the staff and blow or blow on it, and twist it upwards as long as the head of the staff is in position; then well wash away the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the string of a double thread, then tie another at 1/2 length, and join them together, then loosen the knot carefully and turn the head of the staff.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow a little and a little, for it is the muedres; and put powder on it and over the powder a drapelet of a good dye made of burned oil of roses confited with oil of roses and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and the healer of another healer as long as he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for cleansing is as follows: the two shoulders be soft and tender, and the same for the shoulders, and also as large as those on both sides are even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing is when the cure within flees through incision; so it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so that the leech makes an abscess; and make it even, and if you cannot hold it to your fingernail, then hold it with pliers, and then make it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it passes three days, and that which is sore at the root of the penis is inflamed, if you leave it until the leech has made an abscess, and scorched it lightly; if you can move it, and guard against the part of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the leech of things that are sore wound of powder, which we have said in the treatment of leeches and powder, and if it goes too far up, and he goes to the top, he will not harm; cure him therefore, as we have said, until he is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	To retain urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	For the retention of urine: for the operation of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowels, or similar things, which we have spoken of in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not relieved, and you see the retention for the stone which is at the neck or base of the bladder, so that the patient lies on his back; and let him raise his knees to the sky, and extend his stomach from the top of his back, and restrain the patient so that he can stay in this position as long as possible; and then, the neck of the bladder is forced towards the stone at the top, so that the urine is relieved.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so that you must use the extraction tool called a 'syringe', which is the shape of: and let it be made of fine light silver, like the feathers of an owl; and let the tube be half a palm long, and fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method for urination is that you take .i. a double thread, and bind to the head .i. a little ball of wool or cotton, and bottle the head of the thread into the syringe; and wipe the surplus of the wool and bottle up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit down, and he will raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then lightly bottle the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upside down towards the bougie; then bottle the syringe before jusc'a the bladder, and let the patient urinate until he arrives at the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order but for whatever you lead or she goes wrong; then take all the thread out of the wool ball and the ball, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and start over with the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is seated.
des maladies de la vessie	For diseases of the bladder:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When leprosy or fever comes to the bladder, or pus is gathered there, and you see that it distils water and medicine, so do all the instrument that is called "klepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has 2.1/4 parts, 1/2 from one side and 1/4 from the other, so that you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine runs so that it stops well in the root without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and squeeze when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see that your medicines go into the bladder, put the chief of the thermometer in the moisture, and draw it while drawing; if you draw the moisture into the thermometer, and then squeeze it strongly again; it will enter the moisture again, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the form of the subtle clepsydra in which one clepsydra's the bladder: if it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or brass, and the shoulder is higher up; and desoz to the ear or the larynx; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture on which you wish to clisterize the bladder, then tie it between the 16 bladders formed of a good double thread, and heat that moisture on the fire; then bottle the head dou clistere in the bladder, and strain your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
de la piere	of stones,
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtility; and if it is opened, then wash the patient's genitals, and clean them many times, and then rub them; and on many of these jumps the foundations are lost; and the healing of children until they are .iiij. years old is light, and it is heavy for the elderly, and it is light for those between juvenile and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient by enema, in order to extract all the matter that is in the bowels. For it often encumbers one to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and move him uprightly and gently downward, so that the stone descends to the very bottom of the bladder, and never goes up from its place; then let him sit between your hands, and his legs be desoiled, so that the bladder is all turned downward; then examine and feel it from behind.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Then feel the stone in space, and quickly cut it off from the bladder. And if you do not feel it on touching all around, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand; if the patient is old, or if he is young and complete, then let him sit upright; then pour it into its fundament, and examine the stone, and when you feel it at your palm, then feel for the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your palm, and pour it out from behind.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and he orders that he extends to his right hand the testicles up, and with his left hand oste the skin which is under the testicles on the part where they make the size; then i pour spatumile copant, from which it is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make a space between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side; and let it be right on the stone, and your two be together or against the fundament, and let the size go across so that it is wide at the end, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	In case the press should be where it is or against the fundament, that she go without work; and know that there is a part of stone where there are angles and margins: this is good to come out; and if it has part that is flat, similar to a glint, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	For if it has a part where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not go out, so that you extract on the chisels which are also like a file at the top, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you pour out of it sottil corbeau au chief; and if you cannot grasp it in this way, so enlarge the .i. poc lou pertus, and if it is cut, so extract with vitriol:
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, first bottle the largest to the collar of the bladder, then chop it over, then cut it hard, and the small ones after if there are more. And if she is very large, so let her be, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out all at once because his bladder cannot hold it; but nevertheless you should try to extract it, or pull it out with pliers, piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, apply hot ointment and aloe and dragon's blood and bind it, and put over it .i. cloth wet with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess; then tie up the patient tightly around his neck until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie him, if he rises well with oil and water, then cure the wound with dillapicon ointment and basilicon ointment until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrosions of blood in the bladder, and is retained urine that comes out in a certain way so it doesn't run with the urine: then pour this into the wound, and extract that stone, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and pour it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then raise the wound with water and sand and rope, and aid it in all ways that you know how to do, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure it, you bind the legs, and gather the remedies on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	If the stone is small, and it is stuck in the bladder, and cannot pass; if you cut it as I have said above, you will free it from the size. I have already done this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take .i. piece of iron according to this form and be nailed at .iij. angles on .i. splinter:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	then take 1.i. thread and tie it round the root of the stone in the bladder, so that it cannot come out; then draw the thread lightly on the root of the stone in the bladder; and turn the thread back into your hand in the bladder bit by bit, until you can break the stone; if it comes out soon, then press your hand against it; if not, then twist it round again, and so on. If it breaks, it will jump away with the urine, and the patient will be cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do so for any reason that damages it, then he.i. file the stone and another above, then make the rod towards the stone between the two lines, then remove it forcefully, and as soon as the line is removed, clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	may occur that a woman is pregnant, and if it ever happens, let there be great grief, and is defended by three things: one is that per adventure the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to the gaze, even when she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well-versed in this craft of hands; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is more perfectly made than the man's, since it requires making a more profound cut, and it inspires greater fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	Et s'il est nécessaire de montrer cela à quelqu'un, il faut que tu appelles une infirmière bien savante, et ne lui fais pas d'incision, car si tu en fais, ne le regarde même pas. Je. c'est-à-dire la femme qui est subtile; et elle présente une boule bien saine dans la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui connaît une partie de cet art, et elle commande qu'elle fasse ce que tu lui commandes pour l'examen de la pierre ;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And if it is necessary to show this to someone, you must call a nurse who knows well, and do not make an incision on her, for if you do, don't even look at it. I. that is to say the woman who is subtle; and she presents a ball well in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of this art, and she orders her to do what you order for the examination of the stone; and then it is necessary to check well if this woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her foot or foot on the ground and try to find the stone; and if she finds it, then she should hold her foot, and she advises her to press her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she should hold her foot in place, and she advises her to move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder all the way to the root, until she feels it at the base of the thigh; then she should touch the stone with her finger at that spot, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your foot on top of the stone or away from it, and make a small hole first;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then she should touch the stone with her finger at that spot where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your foot on top of the stone or away from it, and make a small hole first; then bottle the blood out of the wound, if you feel the stone so large the wound is; and know that there are many types of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and dull, long and round, and which have rain. If you know their appearances then you will know their issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if he has not gone, then put vitriol broidt to the wound, and let it sit for an hour until the wound is dry; then return to your work, until the stone is hard, and have the tools that I told you about in the extraction of stones so that they can help you with your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if he has not gone, and it is an artery that is torn, then put the powder on the wound and strain it with linen and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it except by chance, and then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the fever of blood has subsided, and the leg is warm again, then return to your work, until the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	of hernial pain
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramie water is no other than a gathered white syrup which is the source of the taste of eggs, and is called 'sifac', and never comes into the egg's shell if one believes that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the egg between the white sifac that we have mentioned; but this does not happen to be a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramie is so weak that it comes from the eggs, and this material is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And this moisture does not come from beating on the eggs, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and such happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is white sifac which we have mentioned, then it is long in shape, like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the cloth itself, then the abscesses are rational with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the leather of the testicles and the white sac, then it feels warm; so that when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all of the introitus because its form is in front.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	So according to this, who comes after the introitus, judge who is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with fire, so that the patient is healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he lies down on his back, on something a little high, and cover him with drapes.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	Then sit down on his left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the stick to one of the 20 ribs at the end of the loins.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula and peel the skin from among the loins to the tip of the hand until you reach a thin piece of flesh, then cut it carefully, leaving a little bit of the skin on the meat, and parboil it very slightly.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the flesh with a large needle, and drain out all the water, then put on your gloves, and draw up the skin. And do not touch the meat with the needle, but only slice it very finely; peel off each piece separately so that you can see well to cut it properly, or the water will come back into it again.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the skin suits you well to your work, then return it to its place when you have finished working on the flesh; and sew together the 20 ribs of meat with one stitch, and wash it as you would the other wounds until it is healthy again.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corruppt by some other disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of corruption of blood; then take the egg and remove it, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, knowing that there are two branches; then take the other part as you did with the first, evenly, and wash the blood, and put in the wound another wet one with oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put there another wet one with wine and oil, and put on the two eggs, and cover them with double cloths, and tie it up all together according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take 2 cloths, and fill them with wool fabric according to this shape and sew them together in the throat of the shirt, and one of the two shoulders should preigne on the bottom until the back, and the other over the 2 arms, and the other two should be gathered in a loop around the neck;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and there is no time when this medicine of the fire caustic is in place of iron tweezers, and that you squeeze .i. the caustic scraper, and scrape the skin of the coccyx, and it is heated as we have said, so that the white cure that contains the water comes out;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the caustic according to this form, and pierce it as with an awl, and scorch it with this fine fire caustic:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the coat in all the ways that you can, until it is completely removed; and be careful that the fire does not touch the uvula; and know that this work is safer; and move with caution to prevent the opening of a vein; and beware of the size of the caustic;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or a opening of a vein or anything else, then treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the sick person is afraid, and does not want to wait for this work because of its ugliness, then you should make a puncture, as I told you, and it is that when you are sure by the meanings that we have said that the ramose water is there,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	make the sick person sit up; then pierce the abscess in the middle of the face all the way through, and place the puncture deep into the neck; and make the hole large so that all the water runs out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton in the hole, and tie it up, and leave it to run out the remaining water, then clean it as long as the wound heals;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the bleach cotton does not let the water run out in the mouth of the wound, then you should put a pen or instrument used to drain the water from drops into it, so that its shape is as follows; and widen .i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 15 days or so, and when it is gathered as before, and in such a way that the sick person's days pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the penis from the anus
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	I know that in this chapter about the use of fire, there are many different ways to treat it, so I think it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the penis.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many penises come from the corons, and most often from the coions; and this is by much case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known that by too much acrid and bitter food, which expands to the bowels, or from impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the abscess according to the color of the flesh; and does not test for pain, and is an abscess wound;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it is a painful and piercing abscess, and of a foxy color, and never comes from a nerve, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a nerve, if it is hot by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not necessary for you to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	Those who are made from the swelling of a vein are known by their tendency to express themselves through the touching of both sides.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well make a size on this resemblance, and on the other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and is that you cut the knot of the coins, then the egg in the top, and the trail is firm white milk, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already hard with these new feathers, then it is necessary that you take the egg, and the cup.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is still alive in the shell, or in this one which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of those held, and the cup rolls.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the feather is behind, then it is necessary that you cop it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are finished, take the wool of sheep wet with oil and wine, then the cure for others as long as they are healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the prostate from the urethra
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an old French text describing a medical procedure:
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient will be less painful when he goes;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this disease is very good if it is treated with caution as described above;
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in any case we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old people did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient lie down on .i. a soft bed, then pour the poultice into his mouth between his teeth.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	for all the vessel that are near to the penis, and wet them with water, and spread them out flatly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then dip the sponge into the tray of water, cutting it into a wide trim, so that the vessels are uncovered, until they are completely soaked;
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then take an needle where it has .i. double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and quickly tie it to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut off the ends correctly, according to the length of the body, and extract the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as you do with other wounds or wound the bowels so that no vessel is left unhealed;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there comes no evil, and all the vessels come forth alive, if it is necessary to draw out the seeds from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the eyes do not lose their vision through the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	of the rupture of the syrup
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this wound is where the medicine, or its extension, comes from these 17 causes: or by percussion, or by jump, or by braying, or by lifting a grievous burden, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is an extension of the medicine, if it happens that it comes little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the apoplexy is even until almost perfect, so that the medicine hurries the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the medicine, that it brings sudden sharp pain, and the apoplexy appears different, showing itself on the skin early, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body away from the medicine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And let there be no separation of the small intestine with the colon, for it is held back and causes great pain to the patient, even when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	For in these cures by fire, lest he should be scorched.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of this work is that you command the patient to keep the intestine in his hand inside the wound, if he can go back in;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let him put his neck between your hands and gently lift up the breasts;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then take off the skin from above, and scrape all the hair from the long hair.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then pour in the liquid inside the waistcoat according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that he can easily come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape off the skin from the chest, making sure that the white skin is exposed all around;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	Then pour in the liquid inside the waistcoat with your index finger, in the middle where the skin is white, and between the two sides of white skin that are exposed;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and remove what is behind the thumb, and place the second hand on top of the first between the thumb and forefinger; and with the little finger of the left hand, push forward the nail of the thumb toward the palm;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to extend the thumb upward and out of the way of the joint behind it;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your two assistants if they feel any hard or white matter wrapped around the intestine; and if you find nothing, cut it open.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or thread made of fine wire, and cut it open at the back where the skin is; then sew it up with the thread after the entrails have been removed; then tie off the ends of the thread, so that there are three threads left;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	and then join one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie them together with a strong ligature of .ij parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	and wrap the heads of the fils, and connect them with a ligature of 0.9 parts, so that no vessels that supply them can enter in, and thus prevent an abscess from coming up;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and then tie the second ligature with a length of string that is two times as long as the first ligature, and after these two ligatures leave the strength of one of them;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then the other one according to the roundness that the ewer carries; and then cut in the part which is desoz the cuir des coions, until it is smooth, and the bow, as we have said above;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Then prepare the wool with oil, and put it on the wound, and add the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized with white of egg that we have said, after the incision, from doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leaves the thread in place while it is chewing; and if it delays at chewing, so let it be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, as long as it chews.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with other cures, until it is completely healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone try to make a cure for hernias with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old one said that it is made thus: as you join the threads of a scarf, so tie the straps, lightly at first, on the outside after cutting them very short;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then sew it together, and heal the injury of him who suffers, as we have said, until he is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No one time comes rupture in the intestines, as we have said, and open their holes; and do not let any of the intestines go to the cliques, and if there is some, it is little, and repairs every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and whenever he stays too much in this place, if he suspects the wound or syphilis, until the intestines come out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and what happens because of the extension of syphilis that is in the intestines, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and opened their holes and opened;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure if it is by cautery, as we have said before; and there is no cure with fire in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient lies still on his back between your hands, then measure the width with two fingers according to the quantity of .ii.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then remove the skin which is above the flesh, and then take the thread and put it on the place visible of the skin;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then press it perfectly to the belly, then measure the .ij. inches which are above the skin on top of the thread, and measure the two together;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then remove the top thread, and do not cover the skin or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the bile of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and then heal by the healing of wounds. And when you cover the thread, if the wound is clean and healed as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The healing is constricted, and has no sign in the rupture, and the cauterization is moist in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the joints is softened in certain men, because the bones that are within them are softened and can be seen; and it is a craft, when one curates him, to make the skin that is softened come out on the natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a stitch, and sewed the superfluity of the skin that is softened to .iij. or .iiij. stitches firmly; then cover between the stitches, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healthy, and tie the thread.
dou chastrement	To cauterize with fire
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I see that cauterization is mentioned in our law, and for this reason I would like to say nothing about it in this book; and there are only two methods: one is that the fire should be used to respond when asked, and to heal using fire; and the other, because we have often had to use cauterization on certain animals to help us, such as sheep, goats, and others. Therefore, I say that cauterization can be done in 2 ways: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one where we use attraction, we should sit the animal in hot water until the skin is softened and relaxed; then grab it with your hand, until it is healed and you no longer feel it. From the size of the cut: you should burn the animal, and tie the leather from the coals to your left hand, then put on the suspender, and cut each ear at 1 inch, when you have well scarred them; and leave no little bit of skin and fine hair which is under the saddles. And this method of cauterization is milder than the one done by attraction, because by attraction something may remain from the cuts, so that the animal wants to luxuriate, then heal the wound as soon as it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here comes the next sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
de la tentigene	of the poison
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the text:
de erratique	Here is the translation of the text:
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation of the text:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text into English:
des apostemes de la marris	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Maitre physician, let the patient know that he should let his hair grow long and even, and if it pricks at its base, keep it still so that it does not move until it has grown.
de l’enfantement	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If he is seized by natural force in the head and the woman gives birth with great pain, and his virtue is weak, so that she sits on a saddle or women hold her; and she rises from oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pours the milk between her two little breasts, of which this is the shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If he is seized by natural force in the head and the woman gives birth with great pain, and his virtue is weak, so that she sits on a saddle or women hold her; and she rises from oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pours the milk between her two little breasts, of which this is the shape: and splits the second, and ties up his nail until the moisture that is in it comes out; and catches the woman's belly as the baby comes out, and if he does not come out, then it is necessary to massage the woman with fenugreek oil and olive oil; then make her lie down and shake her, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour: then now the baby comes. And if his hands go forward and back, then it is necessary that you move them slightly at a time; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on .i. seat, and lift up her feet; then remove the seat from the ground, and tie her, so that she does not fall when standing; and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then he ties his hands to the knife that has been placed in front, and pulls out the baby, and makes it even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the baby's birth on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby comes on its feet, if it is necessary to raise it up:
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn slowly, as long as they are even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	Then stretch it out, little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	As long as the hair is not too long, if it pricks at its base, it must be stretched and made to vibrate with fire.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it does not grow, may God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not heal as we have said, if the wound heals little by little until it is in the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not heal as we have said, if one takes musk of tares, and oil of sainfoin, and gum melted, and grinds all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and puts on the wound of the woman and covers it with this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make it sit in hot water until it is well cooked.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it has been soaked long enough, it is made into a paste with myrrh, and it is put on, and left for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make it sit in a seat, then shake and hold its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, for the poison will now come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the child's birth between its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child arrives in this form, so I put the ball in her hands little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on his neck, and hang down his legs, and be lying on one's side;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend her hands little by little, and then take her hands to her belly, and dislodge her loins so that she is emptied below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and the child does not jump, if it takes its legs and moves its body, then moves its belly upward, and then puts her hands down;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and the child pokes little by little; and command the woman to warm up until the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the exit of the child who comes from the wide one a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it comes to engaging to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if you can't bring it back, if the woman gets up and goes:
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	s’elle ne peut aller, si la fais gesir sur .i.. lit, et le déboute les jambes forment ;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then put the muscle in place that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, if you set her on a  .i.. seat, then study to bring the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and shape the child according to natural form, and make it swing, and command that it swing until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the baby's delivery from his neck, and he had spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the doctor grip his hand, then slowly turn it over and over, and gently pull it.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, if he puts on the natural musk oil of aloes and oil, as we have said, then he orders that she move slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the face sit on .I. seat, and he orders that she bend; and the face shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	by this method for the second part of the treatise
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to doing this for the whole of the second part of the treatise, if the moisture in your finger is gone.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he presses it onto his face and his neck, so that the stick does not hold, let him die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as you have done it correctly, and instruct the woman not to weep even once:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then if he gently
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Says that twins are often born, and only once in a while; and this is not an unusual thing, and it did not happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are an unusual thing, and they do not live, if not named
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	Here is the translation of the provided text:
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never come naturally like us all, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it is grieved, and the treatment as we have said, and be the subtle doctor, and do quickly and easily what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it deserves for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	so many times are formed in the mother's womb. i.e. or .ij. or .iij. or .iiij. or .v. or .vj. or .vij., or more often up to 15., and are all formed in the form of a child by the measure of the wise glorious,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and let him know that the bailif knows all this, for by chance similar things happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so do as what is suitable for those who are in need of it.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose child has died in her womb or stomach, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is appropriate that you know whether her woman is of sound health, and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is appropriate that the woman be supported on her back, and her legs be raised upward,
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister the scabies of .ij. parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated with descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with oils moistened with ale and fenugreek and linseed seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these muscadines;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then pour into the mouth of the woman lightly, then take .i. drop where she pours the wine that is suitable for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care if it is well-dressed so that it descends on his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	If he inserts thorns into his eyes or into his throat or into his mouth or into his palate or shaves off his beard or cuts near his ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if it falls on its feet, he inserts or pricks and hurts the sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is convenient that he hold the thorn in his right hand, and place the cup between his two left hands, and lightly hold the cup with his left hand, and insert the thorn in any of the places we have mentioned, until it is empty;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the thorn:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	and then find another one, or the tier so you need, that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch them evenly by moving one way and the other, so that they come out, and are held in place by teeth, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part stops, so grease his two feet with oil, and push it in that part, and pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if one point stops, so put this oncine or higher up, and make it as much as it comes out all at once.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot be brought back by the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must wrap it in a sheet, until it is completely dry;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	Then apply the ointment to the joint of the foot or ankle, and in the other hand, do the same for the other leg;
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child is large and is stuck in the birth canal, or has an acute angle,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	If it is necessary for you to press the thorny spittle between your two, and make the head and extract the needle.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	Or you rub it with the instrument which is called "almond", of which the form comes with the instruments or paste which follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	And so likewise I make it grow naturally by means of the instrument which is called "almond"; and in this way it grows into a great natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with nails,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head of the shoulder is cut off and forced out, so that it is split, until the moisture which is outside has gone.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces with a knife.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the abdomen or the sides, so that you pierce it until the moisture flows out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if it is stuck in its place, then it should be removed gently, and the treatment of the wound should be light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or breast, if you think that you will take it out with .i. a cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and making the belly or breast, as much as the moisture which is there;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other member has been broken, and the head stays in place,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	so that the hand of the patient is completely freed from the ring, and pulls it out to the mouth of the ring;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then pour in . i. a cup of water, and let it rest.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth is constricted by heat that has come to it, so that it does not work properly
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then provide wet and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and provide plasters, and cut into acidic, moistening, and soothing substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if it has fallen on its chest, and you can make it level, bring what we have said about the live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one does not have power, then let the man be taken apart piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring what we have said about the legs that come out in the mare;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if they come out with blood, so let it be placed in water restricting them, and bring other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had taken the life of one child, then consults another on that body, and denies death to the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the apoplexy in the brain burst, and began to cause great disease.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on an ointment of strong attraction, and inserted a bone, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for there is no bone in his belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I want to heal the wound, and with two hands I will put on the plaster, as long as the woman is in better shape;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and wait for the woman to get well soon, and it was already a little bow at the joint;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter for the sake of that which, when the master tries an odd thing, he may know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, where we put the books; and at two turns to the two shoulders of the two legs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be thinner than the restrector, and made of ebony or boxwood; and they should have a curved shape.
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let his mouth be as big as two hands across, and his cheekbones as wide as a palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the three pieces of the skin be sewed together from one end to the other, a length of a palm and a half or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two pieces are inserted into the mouth of the mare to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made from ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the nails;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and let there be two joints, as you see, of a palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you open the leg with all the instrument, so that the woman sits on one bed, the feet during and the legs open,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then bottle the two joints together in the leg, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand with all the instrument, as you did with the tweezers evenly, according to the quantity that you opened the mouth of the leg, until the ball moves;
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are mounted upside down, and varied in number according to the work; and when you have prepared them, so much the faster is the operation, and so much the higher are the tools for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not mount the instrument well in advance, because there is no excuse for its necessity.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second is ready for delivery, you must instruct the patient to retain her hair and then make her sneeze by pressing on her nose and mouth.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she sneezes, that is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, if it is possible, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, so as chamomile, mint, fennel, camomile, camilac and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a tube or cover from the pot, and the other head into the mouth of the wound,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let the steam come out into the wound; then make it cough, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If so, take the second immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, order the doctor to soak his left hand in oil of sesame or in a musk of altitude, and then let it dry out in nature,
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and wants the second; and when she has found it, if she pinches it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the nail does not come off in extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but then it must be moved lightly from side to side, and then pull it; and it will come out and loosen itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the nail of the finger is bent or broken, we have said the cure for wringing, and for smoke from herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all those things we have said, then take care that you do not follow the trail.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the cunt of the woman, then cauterize with ointment of four-fold power;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it is not well done and then reset, and will come again with force; but nevertheless, when it is well done, if it is not done with care, then the odour of porridge will go up to the stomach and head, and darken the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary that you make smoke that can be done to it: no one of the ancients has tried smoking with dandelion and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument, let one fume the woman at the retention of flowers and of the second if is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to see like to a dog, and one puts the head thin in the nature, and the shoulders wide by fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations on the coals, and the tan until it is wasted, and restart another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet received the foundation of the jaw, but it is broken with a subtle medicine.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary that he who has been broken should break the jaw of him who has not yet been broken, and not break his own jaw with the sputum that comes from him, and fasten the bandage so that he does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put another moist cloth on it with wine and oil, then treat it with ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put a piece of string around his hand, and let it hang down, and when the child walks, let him move his hand, so that the bone does not stick to the skin.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no sudden shock of a wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover this sudden shock: if it is to be cured, as we said in the case of the cane of plunking.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	fistulas that come from the root are a disease, and grow worse than those that come from the root in the space of the .ij. parts, or
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodation is old, if it opens, and with cold water or a weak brew, or
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they do not become such fisticules; and they are understood by whom it is or defecation or windiness when the patient has defecation, and by chance in jump one side.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they are fisticules that pierce only up to the bladder, and only halfway up the shaft; and reach up to the intersection of the thigh, and up to the nose.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus we understand a persisting fisticule at the fundament, and not persisting:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And it is that you stick your little finger or foundation, and stick a fine needle of silver or iron in the fisticule when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is tortuosity, if I put a thin piece of string or .i. horsehair between your teeth so that you can feel the string or hair at the back of your throat;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is no pain or difficulty in swallowing, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	that it does not pierce you; if you hurry to heal it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And if the fistula is persisting up to the bladder or urinary conduit, and if the urine can't be held back with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is cut just to the join of the cunt, then he must hold it coming up to his loins.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twisting or the pain does not come from within, but rather it has already been bent forward, and there is no medicine or sudden relief by feeling;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fissures there is no cure but toil, and the vain ambition of foolish men who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is neither persistent nor ancient, there is hope for health through fire, as I have experienced, and
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and so the patient lies down between your hands on his back; and he lowers his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs bent towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour water on an ash pile, or mud if there is curvature, as long as you can tell where the pile comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	so that the patient's heart is felt at the base of the spine, and if that is difficult, then you put your little finger on it.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then know that the ash has caught the fire; and whether it is uncovered or not, you feel between your thumb and finger, so you know if it is persistent.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If not treated, they will never heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should treat these in a particular way, but it is difficult to do so well; however, it can be done well with care;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one gives, if one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and the bottle is filled hot in the fistula, as far as it comes out smoothly from the base; and make this iij times or iii, until you know that these hairs are burned, which seem to a feather of an owl;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of tent-cloth immerses it, until that which is soaked comes out, and then the doctor of ointment immerses it while wringing it out, and binding it together.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is so, it is good. If not, then it cannot be made well;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it is placed between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the foundation, and between your two palms place a thick covering of tar or syrup, and you see the fistula to that which is under the covering from the palm's tip;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the cover of the encumbrance of the fistula, and seals before the tent, and then treat after, until it comes to the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and will be delivered the trial, and grief; then cursed are those birds-of-prey that seem a feather of an owl, and none remains without.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun does not go out, and a wound between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicine ague.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery assembles .ij. bone things: namely, the burning of those dislocated joints, and the bleeding of blood and drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then the healing of wet wounds or dry sores, as long as the bones are hot, and those dislocated joints are burned in the fire;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	and then heal the wound with the medicine of dry spices.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once healed, it is well and never returns worse.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the very foundation, and is separated from the heart, it will burst at that place, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the pain, and go in. iij. is the medicine or charm or balm, where it is ready to pierce, if there is only a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the iii. ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not over-heat too much, that you do not cover up the foundation which holds the base, and let the dislocations come by natural means;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	In case it is healthy again, or you remove the covering and clean it completely from the base, or with a tool pointed;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	and then my faith, this good tree that is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	and then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part further from the fundament: for that is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And no way are there fistulas according to this manner: and it is when you plug the tent in the fistula, and she is or costit doulx cur of lez lu cuir desous,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if one takes a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put in one end of the wire, and pour it into the tent through all the wire at the hole until it comes to the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the wire from that hole, so that you pour your two from that foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and tie the end of the wire to the head, and join the 12 ends together, and pull them apart, and leave it 1 hour or 12 hours;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain it once, until the wire connects these strings that are between two, and they chafe;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound as long as it is swollen and inflamed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there is no fistula, then pierce it in all ways that you can, unless it is too completely closed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suffice to make a ligature if it is completely closed, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spike that you make for the fistula if it is acute, and then you cut;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, for this you do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	are according to the following manner: they are within the fundament, also as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and cut them off in place.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if they are one or more, and are away from the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are away have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then again when a little water or blood, and has the color of the flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and then again when a little water or blood, and has the color of the flesh. Order the patient to sweat by going to chambers, until the foundations go out, and the seed begins;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them with their moisture, take them by the drape (a cloth), or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and cut off at both ends, then grind them, and powder over some hot powders that are in the place of cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or fire cautery as said above, or with the paste of cautery, then cure it with other cures until he is well;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a sharp and bitter caustic to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the patient has pain, and his hair comes out easily from the foundation, then the cure is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and are pressed with the nail or tweezers and chopped, then heal them as we have said, until they are well, and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you bring the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it into an awl, and then wind the thread over and below the awl, and pierce the awl from the other side, and return the 1.i. 2. threads of the thread through the awl,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is wide; and pulls the thread tight, then winds the thread, takes out the awl, and does the same to all of them, leaving 1. to stop the blood from flowing;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation 1. cloth soaked in oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until they have finished crying, and when they are calm, if the wounds are treated with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	and then thoroughly dry it at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	For often the drying of the end in the intestines, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you scrape the top of a spur or your nail up to the nail bed, which does not let it get wet;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and then heal him as much as he is sound,
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot be made sound, then start the shaving more roughly than before, until he heals all over, and is burned;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then heal him as much as he is sound,
dou fremit	and then heal him as much as he is sound,
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Froge nots of fire comandid on a patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they are grown.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	For the cure is such that you take a straw from an owl's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that straw on the wound, until the purple circle around the wound is completely gone.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the straw until you cover the entire wound, and put it on properly, and scrub the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make this of a dog's or iron's shape according to this form, and be subtle and run on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, lest it may hurt them both, and must press: And if you see, cauterize the pain, as it is before or with fire of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one makes the clister of silver or bronze, or of melted gold or pewter; and no one makes these small or large tools according to these shapes they are brought for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large enema is over wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and I have a break or the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the anus is pierced inside; and on one side there is an opening of iij inches, and on the other there is one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly or Om place the medicines in a bladder of best beer or parchment, and pierce all around the smaller openings,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and place between each hole that there is of space, then pour into these holes a strong thread of twisted rope in ten or twelve times, and wrap around the abdomen so as to form a sheepskin;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument has a strong thread in front of it, then cauterize; and this form is that of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the cauterization with oil or olive oil, or a similar substance, then pour it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then spread the minister between his two hands together, until it is completely dry, then remove the cauterization, and place the patient's legs against the wall,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night, there is more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him with the disease of the belly's decay, and the medicine comes out quickly, continue it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, so be the cautery as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtile cautery where the skin is held in place:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicines according to fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that cause wounds are by the fall of a stone, or the size of an spear or a dagger, or a lance or a staff or a sword, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, because the memory comes in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, if it is from falling off a cliff or similar things, and the skin is torn in many places, and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt a little the aposteme: if it comes to heal the cephalic midsommer if it is not poc of blood from the wound, and let the healing be on the opposite side of the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and prevent the patient from drinking wine and eating large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he cannot urinate, or if his meat is reduced and does not drink wine or eat cheese,
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, if it is an abscess, cotton dipped in oil and applied coldly, or in wine that constricts.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if it is not an abscess, if it is fresh blood on the wound, and it does not move with air, powder, which I will mention a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it burns him, put it on some herbs, until he is well.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like from a sword or similar, and the lips do not come together tightly, then sew them together, like I said for wounds on the belly, by the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	For if the wound is open to the bone and it bleeds profusely, then patch it; but then heal the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard leather.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat large meats, like roast beef and bread, as well as birds, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a boil, and it does not hurt the bone, then cut off the puss, and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which without suturing, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, let it be like a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then a light cure is given: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the method of this powder is this: take Frankincense one part; dragon's blood 16 parts; live coals 13 parts, and the powder finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and hold it firm, until it has completely healed and is joined together with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and let it be without a bandage if it swells; for you do not take off the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make a fire with only live coals, but if you have only Frankincense and dragon's blood, let the fire not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if it has been burned, it moves the wound, most certainly it would be if there was not one of this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some herbs that are digestible, or balls of barley flour made with water and honey, until it no longer has fever;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then he should treat him with other remedies as long as he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of an bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you hereafter about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the throat and is simple; there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery is cut at the throat.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the neck, if there is no other device but to leave the cure alone, and do not put anything that restricts it, for it hurts the neck and makes it retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the extension of the blood goes with the brain, which is the most high member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but be the medicine hot, if as hot water washed down with rose oil, and mixed with oil too, and also washed in hot water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of mine according to this way, and wet with oils.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so the cost and bind it with bandages, then the cure until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and he is full ofbowels, then pierce him or lower him.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery has been cut and blood runs, if he faints and falls, and if you cauterize him, your craft is needed.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	And if his voice from the throat has been cut, or he chokes, and his direction is guarded, so that the meat goes in.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the cut to the curb on the chin of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then wait for the time required, and leave it for a few days, and then treat with oil of cloves as long as he is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek out
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, and the treatment is too painful for you, and these that you cannot bear, leave it until the wound putridity;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be careful and obedient to the doctor's orders;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bones and there is a fistula, then treat it with the ointment as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look carefully at the wound to see if there are any signs of life in the patient: know that such wounds are often fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not submerged, and it is fresh in all its blood, then I do not put the powder to it at first hour, nor bind the blood so that it does not hold completely,
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the heart, and stop the pain.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I add a soothing remedy, and bind it three times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have ointment, put wet cotton on the wound to absorb the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound .iii. days, or .iiij., or more often;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor a strange tremor of the body nor any pain;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good conditions, if you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal with leeches and other cures, as long as he is well;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot be healed, and operated, then know that there is a fistula; so heal as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	and if the wound is from an incision with a knife or sword, and it is simple, or deep or on the back, then heal that which is before;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, of suture; and if it is small, of powder, and if it has pierced the bone, and there are pieces of it, then heal the wound, and if they have been broken, then treat them;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they have not been broken, then let the wound fester, then extract with care;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	For the rupture of the belly is great and painful and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound there jumps out none of the intestines, or the entanglement of the intestines, because of the intrusion of water;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitch is more difficult, and there is no value to it than the little wound that it makes,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	for this reason we do not put back the intestines, unless they are put back warm, for if they are not put back warm,
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell so that they feel cold, then we should not put them back,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and there is no value to it than the little wound that it makes, for this reason we do not put back the intestines, unless they are put back warm,
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the .ij. common seams had in the seam of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the seam of the other wounds of the body and .ij. other private seams are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and each one is more proper with the seam of the belly, and I will say one and declare:
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no matter of the intestine out,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and no further matter is to be put back, this should be done in one of the two following ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when he has been frozen, heat him in a certain way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	Moisten a sponge or .i. a cloth in lukewarm water, only wet,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you cook in lukewarm water, only wet,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and dry the intestines until they are swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never does this wine causing constriction, and is much warmer than water for dispelling wind.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling subside, if moisten the intestine with water or wine and boiled beans are eaten,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this is the intestine stiffened at little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument used to scrape the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to make him bleed.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	so that we do not chop him up unless there is a great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this instrument is used to split it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut it in the corbeau and take off the skin, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound has enlarged, and the intestines have been pushed out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if it is reset in its natural position in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you can do this, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound has enlarged, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	If it is necessary for you to make the sick person walk on their tiptoes.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if she is in the part of the body called "the belly",
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	then place the head and the chest higher than the "belly" parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and so if he rips his belly, it's on one of the 18 parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you understand that the damaged part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so it is necessary to treat what I said in large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds however the patient should be dressed
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then place your hands .i. minister pitously so as to make all the rot go out at his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common way of stitching,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	And leave at the head of the wound. i.e. two spaces, and stick an needle where it is. i.e. with a good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the .iij. joints of the hide with the .iij. joints of the shoulder,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who is separated from the skin inside, as far as you make it pierce that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and join the  .iij. joints of the shoulder together with the .iiij. joints together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	And the removal of a double thread comes through the needle from .iij. parts;
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then join the two ends together in front of the wound;
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave .iij. spaces, and put another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease to do this according to what you have to do with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is contained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and that the needles are small and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the small needles fill all the space, and the too large ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for this reason, let them be moistened;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and do not put the needles too far from the back of the hide and the leather;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not open and tear the wound in front of the seam;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cover the head of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient when they sleep,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I set blankets or sheets on the shoulders of the needles so they stay put.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	For it requires a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and that you join the 20 shoulder blades of leather and the 20 shoulder blades of steel together with one strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these blades together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then twist the thread in the manner in which one twists wool.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and space of a second between each stitch the thickness of a little less than two.
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is seven inches long for the man.
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that this man had or his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was cut with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and this wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was of the entrails well iij. palmes in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought him back his intestine and it was iij. hours before it stopped.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	And so the wound healed just 15 days later, and I treated it, and it was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they said that he would die, but it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in 15 years old where there are no remedies, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I put on cotton wool 19 times a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it was cured;
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	And I will tell you the nine proper ways of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and dip it in the ink only as far as it reaches into the thread;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When it has pierced the thread at its tip to the right extent, as you dipped the needle in ink,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and then let it pierce from the other side into the inside only as far as it reaches to the tip,
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitch is that you also sew like the pelt maker does the fur.
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and you leave the siac once on one side, and take it again on the other, until the stitch is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way to sew, which Galiens properly explained,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is if it is if it is as anyone does, who join the .ij. parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the chiefs to the other chief, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	fix an arrow or a head of mirabene close by, and make it pierce that which is above alone,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the .ij. chiefs of the syrphic;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the arrow, and make it pierce from the outside part all the way inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	The dislocated shoulder.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	and then pierce both the upper and lower parts from the outside right up to the center, in 12 other places along the shoulder blade that are on either side of it;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the method of suturing and it is most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galien thus describes it, and no one testifies to the contrary,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must sew the belly with .ij needles, or there is thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and must one push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with corroded needles;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the belly is torn,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	the縫合应该比腹部的其他部分更紧密。
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the flesh has been moved.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then put on the powder, and rub it in; then put char on it,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the flesh has been moved, then put on any oil that is present, as long as the wound boils.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and make the child sit up, and let the breast and the milk come together.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with others, until it is well;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, put on, sometimes that it begins to go down, cotton wool,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and stir it.ij. times a day until it is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need other medicines in most cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will not connect to main limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary for you to moisten another light limb with warm oil or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place the moistened cloth between the arms and the sides;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or injury to the belly, and many times it happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the black wine enemas are effective, and sometimes the inflammation comes just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it perforates inside, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "Jeun" cannot heal if it is ruptured,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is because of the opening of veins, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the approach to its nature of children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar tissue jumps out of the wound, set it back as well as the intestines, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has turned brown or black, if you know the spot that is brown, so that blood does not come from there;
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	For there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and take those who are between the links.
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two shoulders hanging from the edge of the wound as far apart as possible to facilitate extraction when the pinches pull, and the wound bursts.
de la routure dou boueil	from the cut on the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore them in some houses,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I see that some honorable men were wounded or struck by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach;
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became a fistula and there was discharge and wind;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I will employ whatever means I can to heal him, and I will not stop subtiling until he is well, and I will bind his wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him bound up, I doubted that the disease was still in his belly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no ill effects, but he delayed in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	Take a large testicle, then gather the lips of the wound.
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the testicle has opened the mouth, put it on the upper .ij. lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it holds its mouth open;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then put the lid on the head, and it remains in place so that it cannot be removed,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then again.i. another fever after in that way that before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This chief if it burns in the intestine, and does not cause any harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestinal thread that is wet and cut off
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then take the head of this thread. i.e. a fine twisted linen thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the needle with the thread, and cut the intestine, and wind it in the knot;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing frents is only good according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the internal joints, there is no medicine that can cure it, unless with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Says that every wound or abscess, once it has healed, is called a "fistula" universellement
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most often when she is riding and throwing herself forward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	and the fistula is according to the green opinion a hard and white knot, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also chewed like the feathers of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never in a clear jump, and sometimes in a thick one;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	not at all times, and sometimes enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken about the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no cure,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is only by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by small blood loss or fever;
ou por sa malice;	For his wickedness.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Or cut off what is inside, and on the lips, so that it does not grow again;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Or there is too much bowel;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Or the blood is thin, and the material is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Or the medicine is not good for the cure; or because corruption is a way of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	Or by reason of the property in the region is late digestion, and late health, and flees by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	Or there are veins or osses:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have presented all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	That fistula may occur in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for it is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands. Car il i a aussi fistules qui ne venont pas as voines, et as veines, et aux ners, qui ne sont point grandes.
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	ou au syfac, or to the small intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the principle member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great surgery, and there is only work and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula so it does not come until I have said, and you have finished with the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you can see it clearly, if take a tent of rain or iron, the fistula is straight, and I want it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, seek out a subtle tent of pitch,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the pitch will bend it into curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if it bursts from the fingers, and you cannot find it well with your hands,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if the poultice is applied to one of the holes,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for if moisture comes from one hole to another and moistens it, and cleanses it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	and then wash it thoroughly with your power, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is completely shaved,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask well the patient of the pain that he feels when you press your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in some of the places that I have told you, if the wound is deep according to what I have said;
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and the bone is broken and the corroded rust that is within it;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the cure as long as she is healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is very deep on the right side, you must cut it perfectly, as well as you can.
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then dip them in a medicinal potion and pour it over the top of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	as long as the medicine eats away the excess that is held at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments healing sore horse, as long as he is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	if it is not healed by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then the scrape.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerve in the principal members is not injured, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if his nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackening, so long as the corruption is all bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the matter with care until he is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not healed, and return to his former state,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not yet healed, and go no further:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	If you are in doubt, and ask as long as you are at the bottom.
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too complete, so you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	If there is no other remedy except to weaken by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone rotten, and you can pull it out with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with suitable instrument for that purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are several bones, if they are pulled with care so as not to break them, and leave only one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes him ill, and there is no fear or doubt,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it is hot and moist and tender, and frees the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you do not take them off within an hour, put something that causes inflammation on the wound,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the leather is rotted around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then the bones will come more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a big bone, like a leg or thigh
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you only treat the corruption as far as the blackness is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of the bone corrupted, and comes up to the socket;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it fits and covers all the way up to the corruption, and then cures it as long as it is stuck together;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may use this as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was .i. a young man of 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body.
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as long as the matter came to the leg, and was gone by a large abscess, and had no cause to go away by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the mirror, because of his madness, opened so much that it went up to the abscess,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and corroded away matter, and became a fistula, and I came out much more than all the bile that came from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many more I have cured within three years, and there was no skill in the art of hands
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as long as I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and that which runs through the pores with great force;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his body became red with youthfulness, and had an amber-colored complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I built a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one came against the other on all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurried, and I entered into one of the openings as far as I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it corrupted and destroyed, and it came to the corruption up to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I loved that which I saw of the rotten bone, and I took care that there was no other corruption than that which I had;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with drugs that have long been used, and cannot be bound;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I uncovered it again, and saw the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I took care of the corruption that continued in the bone, and loved it, and then I held it, and began to bind the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I cannot as long as I caulked an artery with my hand, and drew it out to its whole length.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicine; and he was healed and firmly sewn up,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and did not need to repeat the work of the fire for the weakness of the disease, which could not endure it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For by the evacuation of blood it happened often, but he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and gave birth in place of the bone a hard mass, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary to all things, nor did it affect its growth or decrease.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place of the trunk, let it be in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take .i. thread, and draw it to the head of the bone which is open,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command no one to extend it up;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another strap of a thicker rope than the first line, and tie it on the bar that is behind the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and extend the head, so you pull the broken bar away from the shoulder,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the bar on the top where you see silk, so that the silk does not damage the bar;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and heat a piece of iron or a bowl to burn out the bone so it covers the rotten socket;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then discover the whole char; then heat a piece of iron or a bowl,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then sear the one part to the other of the corruption, and be the sear sure from the long of the corruption .i. poc, if as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, so to cure the joint that is corrupted, and sear the bone where it is contained on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the 11 joints, so there is not another injury than that of the copper;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is where the hand joins the wrist, or where the foot joins the leg, so this is a very painful thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but anyway it is necessary for you to ask about this corrosion, how does it affect you?
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean thoroughly in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not affect you negatively;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the teeth;
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their grossness and fineness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each type of operation he prepared his instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this craft,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the manner of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so that you will know the instrument you need according to what is appropriate for that craft.
dou feu	ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes death from this by the malice of the member, which is greater, from failure of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, or that they seem to be burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then comes the corruption of the member from member to member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold of the whole body; if you hasten the coppering,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the stinging of certain venomous beasts, as sea scorpions and weasels and others,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	For if it is by corrosion at the root of the neck, if he covers it, and does not give him room to come out until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes only up to the hand, if he covers it up to the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	And if it comes up to the arm, if he covers it up to the neck; and if it passes the neck, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and do not vary the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so on until the corrosion comes or stops: if it comes in the first joint, then go after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes or stops, go through all of it;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, go to the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes over the knee, then there is no other remedy than to make the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way of copper or silk to wrap the limb so that you tie it up and dislocate it,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister of the two lines downstream, and another minister of the other line upstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you disengage the cord that is between the iij lines to i spatumile wide, as long as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	And the cloth or silk, and put from each side .i. a linen drape, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and brings another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood comes due to the injury, he should cauterize the place immediately,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine as long as it is completed,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then cut off the limb with a knife, and heal it until it is well.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that there was once in a certain town
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	a man who had a blackness that seemed to be burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion came first in his two feet, so much so that it stained the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the honor saw the corrosion, if it was coated with copper, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after he returned to me the corrosion or two of the hand, and came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put on him reflective things after purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said that I cut off his hand, and I don't, that I had hope of reflect the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and doubt also that if he cuts his hand, he will not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtue of the man was feeble; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he struck off his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I know of no other remedy but this, that if one needs it, one should do so.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No time comes when the abscess is in its native place, and delays for so long that it makes great assembly of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then rot and pierce, and spill the bowels, and stay the viscera as our servants;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is also soft like.i. silk threads untied,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not corrode yet to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is that you heat the skin all over, and most importantly when it is thin, just as we do with cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not burn for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have noticed that the leathers are drying, and the corruption is not yet complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the leather is hard like a shield, so that the cure with hot water:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	looks like there are large breasts, and the bow that hangs from it has a foul smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then apply Egyptian medical ointment, which is made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	Take oil and olive oil, and chalk, evenly, and put it to boil in a vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and also as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and boil it in the pot, and strain the liquid, and pour out the urine.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this mutch times, till the sinews are destroyed, and the joint is broken;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is cauterized with fire of ash,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ash from a vine's wood, and pour water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	Then let it flow, and bind up with strips, as long as you know that the breast is well wrapped.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor ash from the burnt ashes
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if you use water and honey, or a little bit of lead oxide;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you use honey and wine to make it, because the honey has the property to purify and wash;
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and let the wine be made ready for the saint.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have engaged that the breasts are well changed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the cauterization of that which causes pregnancy hurts her,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and is that you squeeze plaster definitively, and do it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you anoint with certain medicines and ointments, which I have spoken of in the chapter on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if it is small, then the catheter cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if a little piece of iron is put in it, and an Egyptian ointment put in a tent,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	where the ointment is bazilic, as long as it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, let it open so that the catheter can enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the hole is above or below where the catheter goes,
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the wound is completely healed, so that it doesn't cause a scar;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you can't cover the navel as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	If it appears in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest level where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is perfect, if it does not leave anything behind.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cope with it yourself as you see,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	If it appears in such a way that the bow goes lightly down, and does not leave anything behind of the bow:
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medicines that solidify over the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are placed on a linen drape that covers the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then wrap around the chest with a band that is wider at the top than at the bottom,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	and apply oil to the other drape according to the amount of the protrusion,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on top of the breast for support, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the breastbone, often removes to remove the cloth,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what corre from the cloth, whether it is poison or not, or enough, or digestible, or undigestable;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is swelling or not;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when this medicine has been extended in such a way and you see the nature that leaps on the breach of the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts begin to erupt, and bring them closer.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then let it down in the morning, or in the day, and when you uncover the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change. I. other cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if milk comes out undigested after many days, knowing that the breast does not get irritated.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poison comes after a long time, so that you do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For health approaches. For there are people who delay healing in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	And if milk comes out undigested after many days, knowing that the breast does not get irritated.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if it is late to breathe, and is stretched out, so put together medicines seething moisture in substance and drying in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	if as a remedy finally, for there is much acid, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a final remedy, and make it with rose oil, and dilute it with equal amount of plain wine;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then the confit and use it; and this also makes honey cooked thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	as soon as the inflammation is over,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it has come out of the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in a bowl, and let it sit by the breast, and never administer it as an antidote for long,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of lily of the valley, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simple drugs or compounds: grind them, and make a powder, and put on honey that I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that corruption is complete, and causes impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the limbs;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the nail of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is a wound that arises from a sore on the nail of the hand
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or in other parts such as the feet, or perhaps it arises elsewhere;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when he is worn out and one does not pay attention to him, then he becomes a wound that causes great pain.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and get bow so that they root the nail, and by chance cut them all.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion up to the bone, so that it comes painful stinking, and is the head of the two large ones, and is the color running.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you cure it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	So that you take all the waste that is retained by the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail is pushing forward and pricking, and bleeding;
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	so that you put the right treatment on the nail that stops it from pricking and bleeding;
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the bottle on top, and chop this hair carefully and lightly.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put over the remaining hair burning and corrosive remedies to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, heal with onions as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, chop and trim it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the two corrupted, then the cup of wine as mentioned above,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until he is well;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is wounded and drunk, and he feels great pain, then you must first heal him;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail with a sharp knife from side to side,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and guard so that the cut does not go up to the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, let something be put on that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand's joint
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two joints that sometimes cause pain in some men's hands are fully carnate.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance he has broken or dislocated it, and never has a finger been dislocated.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and no two grow from the root of the joint, or their birth is in either of the two legs.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	The child born without a joint between the two legs remains immobile.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and if one is born with a joint between the two legs, by chance it becomes mobile.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the width of one who is chubby so is light, in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	taller it at its root with a wide spatulum.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Who is born in the root of the joint so is hard to cure: if you hold him down.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In who is born or should be cut at the derrièring noot, so it is that you first chop the roundness up to the bone:
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then wrap the bone with a suitable cloth, then care for it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, or by the assembly of wounds, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you wrap this joint together, so that it repairs itself according to its natural form;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two cloths or drapes soaked in oil and rosin, so that it does not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	Put between two thin pieces of wood, as long as the legs are joined together.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When a joint is heated with fire, it becomes soft; when it cools down, it hardens again.
Des vils	are evil.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These vile things are large wrapped packages full of melancholy nonsense, which come in multiples from the body's members.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and there are more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry than with others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It therefore seems that you should never give them a purging of bile, but treat the basileus.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure for iron is as follows according to these two ways: one is to burn it, and the other is to draw out the black blood with a hook.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and this other way is that you take the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The size is determined according to this method: raise the first leg with very hot water until the thick muscle is softened.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Then strain the leg of the sick person from above the thigh to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	Then cut the vein in .i. inch, or in .ii. or in .iii. inch wide,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then clean and stretch the leg firmly with your hand, from one side to the other, as much blood as the disease allows;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then let it lie, and command that he dye his meat with blackCole;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and begin again the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are clear, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The healing method for this is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is any hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then dip it or bathe it, and raise the leg in warm water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then dip the inside of the thigh from the hip to the shin, or in the part of the leg to the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then dip the skin at the bottom, and peel the vein from each side, until it is felt as smooth as possible.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it looks red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin it seems like a white thread;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then dip the nail very slightly, until it is lifted from the skin, and then peel it gently;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then make a bandage of another length of cloth over it; then scorch the skin on the wound until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then raise it up, as you did, and fix it to another hook, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then make a bandage of another length, or more if you need it, then scorch the skin and wrap it around the foot;
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then tie and wrap it tightly, then scorch the skin and continue wrapping it, reducing the size each time, then finish wrapping it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull it out and raise it up, then put a needle into all.i. strong double thread
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and tie and draw it, and put a knot, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as long as it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from coming undone, for if it comes undone, if you cannot pull it out and raise it up, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished treating it, if put wet wool in wine and oil on top of the wound; and heal it until it is well.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if it is visible it is twisted and bent together, and is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	If you should open it, twist it, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that you cover the vis with if it is twisted, and does not cut it, but covers the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of a large size, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and it may also occur in other parts than the legs, and such an eruption may arise from a sore on the skin that breaks open;
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	if it comes from within the body, coiled up and winding around, coming between the skin and the hide;
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the onset of this illness are that it comes to the leg a very great swelling,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the places change, and begins the disease suddenly, also like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the chest is opened, if you wrap a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches thick around it, and then cut it off,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth hanging down to the leg, and every time that it is in a certain point of departure, if the wrap around the cloth, and the new one;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too far away, then chop off a part of it, and wrap the rest up, and do not cover the whole thing up until it has completely come out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you chop it, it will get stuck in the chaff, and cause an abscess and corruption where it is, and bring about a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little until it reaches the heart, and nothing remains of it except the core;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and this wound does not heal when treated with long palm leaves or with thin branches;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and ten strong hands came to me, of which she had one palm's length; and when you cut it, if a little raised or hollowed out, and pierce it as far down as possible.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; and the material which is inside is made void, and brought to the place where the putridity occurs every day, then heal it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never use this hand for any work, and least of all when she opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes out raised and bent, and where it bends; then heal it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The worms that are born between skin and shield
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "buffalo disease" because it often affects buffaloes.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between skin and shield, and it goes everywhere up and down the body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and the scent is felt well from member to member, until it removes the skin where it has gone, and jumps around.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is infected with some humors, so that they come towards it and crawl and shine and worms or grow in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt arises from his ill-being, for when he goes through the body, and he rises up to the head, and comes out at the mouth,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	For it may enter again and destroy the oil, and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him cured and treated, so that he can only go:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	if so then you must first lie down and stretch out from a strong rope tightly,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut on top and tie firmly, and let it be pulled perfectly into the cart, and you don't see it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if so then apply fire cautery to it until it dies,
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it causes is that it corrupts the oil, if so as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see the head coming near the oil, then hold the eye firmly in place; then cut it off, and throw it away.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is appropriate to use the patient for the preparation of solutions of medicines to remove bad odors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and if there is meat that has become rotten.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	For pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it moves from one limb to another; and I saw the one that I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and then I saw it rise like a worm to her shoulder;
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	as soon as possible, like fresh silver when cutting from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain leaves the shoulder joint and enters the shoulder blade,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then soon after, it spreads throughout the whole body, until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	and then she told me that her body was twisting tightly around her torso, as I saw it happen to her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how she moved her member to another, for I have never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I had heard that many people wanted to move their pain from one part to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I have never seen it, however, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that was because the woman had a narrow waist and open veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason it appears that the wind is forced back;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not appear to be in accordance with this reasoning for those who are prone to illness, and have moist bodies and reopened veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the wind is forced back at its source,
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	let the doctor who treats this disease, as with foul-smelling pills, and serapin pills, and similar things.
Des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the color of the fur or the place where they fly.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their shape is such that some have large points, others small, some are cheveux, and others soudées.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those who have .ij. angles, and those who have langues, and those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which shakes in any member so shakes according to .ij. ways: or in a principal member cheveux,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as the brain, liver, pancreas, kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she dies, then you see the sign of death, which I will tell you later.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If you are able to extract this arrow, for death comes after many preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and if there is no sign of the arrow, and it is not completely extracted, then bend it, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and jumps out on the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when amputation, gangrene, and convulsions are in the limbs, and inflammation and swelling of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of food.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is absent from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the moist scabs there seems to come a pulse-like sound, and also like smoke;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and these signs reveal it, if you hold it in your hand, and if the arrow is not stuck in [the victim].
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it pierces or stings is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it had been driven into some hard thing, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the arrow changes course like a bird, and in short black blood, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	so that death comes quickly.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that stings the neck is that there is no foam coming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the color of the patient changes, and he/she sighs heavily and gasps for breath.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters into the shoulder-blade in the covering of the shoulder, take away the little ribs; and he gives great pain and great sighing and movement of all the member of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters into the stomach, by chance if any meat is digesting out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters into the belly, and in the gut there is no passage by the bowel, so there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters into the bladder, and in its exit there is urination and going away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the aid and the spine from the back and the force and the thigh and the legs, and the limb-like are safe according to many provisions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the loin or the artery, and it does not venom, for as I will tell you that it happened to me, so you should do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man who had an arrow in his loin or bladder in the root of his penis:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and I pulled it from another side, taking away its fat from the ear, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And throw a arrow that it hits in the fat of oil of the paper dry.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was re-aimed, and I only got to hit the tip towards the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was big of an archer blue, to all I. It is light without ears; The game was healthy, and there came no bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And throw an arrow in the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was an archer's ear:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loved the beards, and I made them grow as long as I could, and I healed the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I tried an arrow on a man, that it was in his leg or belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then he had passed three days, so he did not change his disposition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the arrow, and I set it up, and I shot it, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to see a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and do not keep the arrow inside him, and do not delay his natural movements;
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor does it find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And see another man, to whom an arrow has been shot into his face, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and causes great suffering of pain; and many others too.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And bring an arrow to the king, who was wounded in his neck, so that the arrow remained in him.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was a little to the left at the lower part; and the arrow was entirely inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat him after he had been wounded for three days. The wound was very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I wanted to taste the whole subtle drink, and I did not feel it.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	And he felt no tingling or pain in his left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was the tip of an arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the leech-infested leech-oil for digestion, lest the leeches inflame it;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and let me know where the arrow is.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put plaster on his hands every day, and quickly heal the wound, and delay so that the patient remains for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he felt the arrow. I told him to move his hand inwards from day to day; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a corrosive liquid by my hands every day, as long as it was open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and test, and feel the tip of the arrow which has settled in its place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I tested by opening the wound with this medicine water until I clearly saw the tip of the arrow;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and well passed the terms in .iiij. months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I opened up the wound with tweezers, and pulled it from one side to the other, and could not remove it;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I ceased not from subtility and contrivance of devices, until I had taken the same. i.e. a good pair of shears.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to what shape it will take at the end of this chapter, until I had taken it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and was sewed up the wound, and healed the patient entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your remedy on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters compare only a few small things, and those that are present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	try nine operations and nine instruments for the removal of foreign things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows are taken from the limbs, or they are not; but according to the following manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	if they enter by way of the hole where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which leaps is arrow-head-first into the body, it is an entering arrow; but it never now remains in place.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not leap, if it leaves the bow as soon as the string is drawn back, and the flight is ready;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, if it is left like this for some days, and moves every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, then pierce it with a small sharp thing, until the inside is opened up, and then treat it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes into one of the vents at the base of the skull,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have spoken about to the patient: if not treated, but left it for a while until it is even after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if an arrow comes just to medicine, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not lodged far into the bone only, and does not come just to medicine,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and if the patient remains for some days without any bad accident, then the machine of traction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged very deep and cannot come out, then administer hot tar, as I have told you; then treat the wound as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is placed in the center of the chest so that it cannot be seen, if one seeks it with all one's strength.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if you take it with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot do so because of the pain from the wound and because of the arrow's depth;
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein, and the wound is very large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and try to extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow so that it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you can pull out the bone that is lodged in .ij. parts of the muscle that you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as far as you can pull it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you don't break the arrow, but rather pull it more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, if the joint is rotten, then cut it off, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain of extraction makes you uncomfortable, then administer what we have said in our chapter about the remedy with the paste;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be careful of the nerve and vein when incising, and do not try to extract the arrow without risk,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or hot or cold, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form they were in when the arrow came out,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do it, then follow what those who show you how to do it say.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, where he does not open anything of it, or the skin is swollen in a certain place, if one sees it or feels it apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut it down as much as the nails can take hold of it, and then remove it: if it is too large now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around, as much as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, let her go on trying to extract it as long as she can;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrow in it, then squeeze it all the way down;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if there is a piece of wood, and you have pliers, then use the pliers; or
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	and if the arrow tip enters into the handle of the tool; and then squeeze completely out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is stuck, then it is an instrument with a point entering inside, for the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	and if the arrow is touched, so that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as best you can.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow enters or hurts the chest, abdomen, bladder, or coast, and it is close by, and you can cover it, then do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and keep yourself from burning a vein or nerve, and then remove it, and then cut into the wound, that is the job.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and heal until she is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The form of the growing hair is also like the feathers of a bird,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	For the tip of an arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the claw for piercing and for catching, as this is the shape:
des voinnes dou cors communes	For the veins of the neck, common to both sexes:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins where one is healed are .xxx., from which there is or head xvi.,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	this is to say: .ij. batans that are after the ears, who are called the "doux herbech";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the .ij. arteries that are in .ij. temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and .ij. veins that are in .ij. eyelids of the  .ij. eyes, who are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the nape of the neck;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two ligaments that are at the jaw;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are at the base of the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one generally hears are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cerebral, and it runs along the left side, and is called by lay people "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the muscle is called "fast", and is composed of the cerebral and the basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and it is called by lay people "vein of the wrist"; and the basilic, if it is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it gentle "vein from the belly", and is on the thigh.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and that one which is said to open clearly above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the small vein is the one that is between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has three raindrops;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the foot is: one is if it is outside the fold of the left thigh pocket,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second section, which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nace", that is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are .ii. veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	and the vein that runs behind the ears, which helps with old cataracts and migraine headaches;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the vein, as I will tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the fire on the area where the veins are; then tie the patient's neck to a pole,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the 27 veins appear behind the ears in 27 lews dependent from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Then hold them both by your side, and where you feel the pulse on your side, sign with your finger;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance, and stick it into the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand up towards the head;
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and a layer of fat and well-prepared meat. The vein must be thoroughly cleaned, and blood must flow freely from it as long as you can see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then remove and clean it thoroughly until it is healthy.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have spoken of the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The two arteries that are in the two temples, so worth it to be drained old-fashioned
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and seede, and obtalmies used, and to the chest of tears with eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the patient so is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	is that the patient holds his neck out, until the two veins open widely;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse on both sides of the neck, and then sign with a hand;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	Then, place your hand on the vein at the base of your little finger, and pierce it with the needle.
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift up the vein, and tie it off, just as you did in the previous five veins, and let blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then, remove the handkerchief, and put your little finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then let it rest until it is healed; and we have spoken of its tying and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The pain of a headache can be as great as the pain of an old disease of the face and migraine and palpitations.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called a "fosseur", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or another object, and let out the blood slowly according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the neck for the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy and never use a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the fire must not be too hot; and the vein should be cut across, because the bone is near, and by chance a spark of fire might light when it is thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The two veins that are in the arms, and with hair, and with an ulcer, and with redness, and with oil, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of its neck is that the patient does not dislocate his neck by twisting it with any chain, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the medicine, and let the medicator cross through, a little of long flame, a little broad, for there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it will break; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then put it on cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The medicine of the wound from birth if it is hot and dry, and at once of fever, and of diseases of the face,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as migraine and rash that comes on the face, and even when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of health is that the patient pulls his hair, then hold his nose with your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a long thin flame, and light it in the space between the 10th and 20th nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open easily, and the pain will start now to run;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not stop too much in vain, and make it run according to your need, then let it rest one night, for it is soon healed;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of fire:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	and the wound of the five fingers is helped by the stretching of the linen, and by the swelling of welts, and many diseases, and hemorrhoids, and corrosions, and herpes, and ulcers;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the wound is such that the patient's neck is stretched from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and if the master stands over the head of the patient, and the patient seizes one hand,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	Then clean the vein with a long cut, then treat the pain gently as needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then repeat in the other vein, then cut it off, and pull out the veins with care,
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not choke; and leaves it until morning so that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of the limbs
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The tongue of the patient is injured by biting into the lip from above, and by the corruption of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and pain in the neck and throat.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of this injury is that the patient sits before you, with his neck held back as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right and one on the left of the lip.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and the color is dark, and they are surrounded by small black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	So take both sides, and if you do not know them and are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So take the larger of the two sides, and do likewise with the lower, since this is a middle way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the two, take the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Of the two, take the tongue. It helps after the treatment of the head and the strangeness in the throat, and the diseases of the eye, and the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healing arts is that the patient dies between your hands before the sun, and the tongue looses, and looks down in each corner a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Heal them both then, and don't become too confident, for the arteries are fragile.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins at the sides which one usually heals are healed according to .ij. ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or they pierce with a sharp knife at all .i. flame, or with a small olive blade so that it is called "aneasil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and narrow according to the width and constriction of veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame is thin when named damp, and is wide as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And has the skill to open the flat veins that are full of thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And this is the form of the olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle than the point, and it is for saving the subtle veins, where there is subtle blood of lemon color.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The antidote of the basilic, which is one of those veins, so help those who are ill with a sore throat, and where the neck, and chest, and stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is for the healer to heal gently, and to bind up the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he binds the artery, and the blood flows, if the binding is tight, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be held by fire but cut off as with a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic does not open clearly, then you should cut it off and change it to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or if you do not want any rain on it, or if you cut the vein at the base of the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and hold the fire to it as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you can distinguish the position of the shoulder, it is also necessary to extract the arm, that you touch the position as long as you know the limb.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the position of the neck, and then tie the arm, and cut off the vein with a knife without burning it;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the neck dislocated, for it is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see draining at the top as if it were urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Haste thee now, and place thy hand upon it lengthwise, and then remove thy hand swiftly, that such a thing may not happen again.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the shoulder rest there, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the shoulder is not dislocated, and he goes away, and the medicine is not applied to him, if the artery opens, for the head of the shoulder is dislocated; therefore, the shoulder is dislocated.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a twig of fig tree, and make it, and take one half thereof, and place it above the other;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if it does not burn, it is good; if not, apply the powder that stops bleeding;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the application of the powder does not occur in many situations due to the small size of the wound, and the power of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	the vein in the middle that helps to treat the pain at the top of the head and the neck.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	For this reason, it is composed of the basilic and cefalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon that he warm himself by the fire which is burning, and if he over heats too much and he burns himself,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the patient is blackened, and maybe he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any home by its subtility, then you must heal the instrument anesil; and avoid the nerve with your strength.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the .ij. nerves, so let it be long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The pain of the head is due to a draw of blood from the top, and it hurts the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to strike with fire the olive or the merlin, because this is the most saved of all veins, because it does not cut the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to choose the lighter one first, and do nothing wrong the first time, and start again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps inflating the leg with air at first, but do nothing wrong the first time, and it is not necessary to grieve.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about a healer is that healing should only be used to maintain health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent diseases from occurring.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and the healer must practice in one of the three veins that are: cerebral, facial, and basilar.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must fasten in the beginning of pregnancy, and in autumn and winter after dining when the sign of satiation appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one must fasten on the first day or third day, after .ij. hours or .iij. days of every day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The fasting that is prescribed for illnesses has no determined time limit, but it should be done every day or some days at specific times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one must not fasten for children before they are 12 years old, and for women only after seven months of pregnancy.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Do not seek after the old who have passed .lx. years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when some are sought after, in whatever way, it is necessary that he who wants to heal them should turn the entrails of a light clister.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if there is a blockage of wind, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful toxins to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	do not seek after those who are too soured by meat, nor those who are greasy, as long as it is necessary, nor droopy ones.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if he is affected by the passion of colic, vomiting, distention of the belly, many times visiting his wife, labor, watching and fasting, and all this virtue, or by something of the weapon or heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	and then carefully adjust the humors, he becomes fat without it, through meat and drinks and medicine, if you have a reason for it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	and then enter or bathe, if nothing hurts him, to adjust carefully his fever;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal him from the pit of the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect yourself from work, hunger, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	be silent and jointed, and be the saint higher than he who is saned, and rub his arms .ij. times or .iij..
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or small, it cannot run without pain;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the neck with hands, until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	Then wet the fire of a little old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein to heat it a little where he wants to cauterize.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not freeze and fails to burn.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run like strings for the surgeon, and some that are prone to windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts fire on it, if one takes away the fire, and cannot open the vein, and is thus among those:
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens a vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in such things the patient must be warned.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if he opens the vein for the first time, it is good; but if not, then let him begin again a little bit more of that place or above the hospital, if the veins are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are swollen and the patient hopes, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bandage his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	for in case he comes to a hospital; do not enter or bathe, then begin the surgery if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the break is small, or the sun so low that you doubt it will not hurt as much as you see; but in this break also I fear that the fire will be too intense.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work it a little so that the blood comes out; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the blood coming out, do not put on any powder, but rather put a little oil on it, for it calms the pain and is soothing in this area of the body; the powder causes irritation.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and apply oil to each wound that you heal, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this middle one makes a triple and bowing of the ears, when he is put on top; but if it is too large, it splits subtilely.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes an abscess that is large many times, most especially when it has not been thoroughly washed except this one time or when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hurry, and put on top a wet sponge in water and in silk a little warm, and holds it an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the escape of blood from the vein, and if it remains at rest after a few days no black or green, then do not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh made up in juice of calamus, mistletoe, or likeness.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there was an abscess and appearance in the leg of the bazaar: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, that is the appearance bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So don't put on anything of what we have said, for perhaps there is no artery at the place; but patch it up firmly with plaster, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Car if the sun is not bright, let it go out until it is red; and if you see a big lump, let it go out until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are ill and have the need to extract blood, you should make the wound wider and the flames wider.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and you should heal them often, and you must heal them diagonally, not straight; and
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of healing is saved from the decay of blood and the damage of nerves, and it is better than long-term healing;
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to him whose heart is in the right place, it is good to give water in grape juice; if he is heated up, so does the blood go twice or three times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of cold complexions, if he drinks before the bath water in muscat syrup, or in honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chilies, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he swallows at the bath, after the exit of blood from the vein, it is good that he hums broth and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use of other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits blood from his arms, and sometimes also, if it seems good, when weakened by much vomiting, that he recover little by little, according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits blood from his arms after the first vomiting, and he has a strong fever, if he recovers .viij. hours after the first vomiting, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who vomits again on another side, if one should vomit again the next day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For it has mouth of blood within the body that is already warm, and makes fever come; if one should draw great quantity, and widen the opening as much as a pommel.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	and that you treat all the symptoms of illness, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come in place of a surgeon.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not come until you see the dislocation of the arm, and make the blood come out a second time, and the break is closed, that you press firmly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	and if it is curved, that he extends his arm gently, for this would be painful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but leave it as long as it heals the second time; or you put at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen from the vein comes out.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and place on .i. piece of cloth wet with water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is bleeding, let it be and do not squeeze it, until the abscess has healed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if need be, drain the blood a second time, if it heals in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is cut off from the artery at its base for the sake of preserving the arm.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the cutting so is that the patient holds his hand in hot water until the tingling is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then let it be moved gently, so that the vein appears clearly, then cut it now from across, not from the wide nor from the long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the cuts be wide, and cut well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water, and leave the blood running in the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is hot water, I will not re-boot my hand, for it is more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein of this leg is saved from all other veins, as it does not contain an artery or a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The vein of the right hand is saved from all the diseases of the liver, and this is its method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	extract the hand, and pour hot water over it, until the vein is hidden, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cut through it all at once, you will not cause any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	do not cut too deeply, for the nerve is exposed all along its length.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put your hand in warm water, it will freeze in the wound and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and cotton wool on the vein to seal it permanently, and do the same for each artery.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The doctor will tell you to hold your hand on the left side for the sake of the disease, and do everything as I've told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The treatment for the pain in the foot is good for all diseases that come from the body's core,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	good for all diseases that come from the body's core,
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of this remedy is that the disease drinks warm water and rubs the vein until it stops.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and on top of the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go most of the rain;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	so as to not hit where it is more wide rain, or at the ankle, so as not to hurt.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, so as to not hit the nerves that run alongside, and heal it in the same way as when you are coping; and let the flame be put out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he can't get out of it, put the foot in water, and leave the vein well drained.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it is necessary to saunter at first, then begin again on top of that little bit, because the lees are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerve, if as we have said, and in this way do with the other stone equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The lees of the vein are to be cut at the foot, and their sauntering is to be worth the pain in the hip when it is for blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of this sauntering is that the patient enters or bathes, and removes it from the foot. there are three things in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise does not open the vein; and if it opens, so that the blood runs in all ways that you can, and through crossing.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and wait until you cut it, for the vein is out, and it is very wet with blood.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not stop it, so that the blood runs or does not run from the foot of the leg, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nails.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make the blood run so that you can see it, then let it rest on the leg, and put cotton on it and hold it in place; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Ventose remedies
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	The text describes the use of suction cups, made from horns, arin, or glass:
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this type of suction, which is without striking, has two ways: it can be used with all types of fire or without fire."
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	And the suction that is made by striking and drawing out blood is made in 21 parts of a horn,"
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	where the one is all at the top; and the other is at the neck.
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and there are five others at the sides of the neck; and the ventose goes down to the chin.
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and there is one above the shoulders; and one on top of the elbows;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the ventoses are at the sides of the arms; and the ventoses are at the sides of the legs.
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the suction cups of the .i. feet; and the suction does not treat blood unless it is small veins that are scattered in the cart,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore do not stop it if there is none; for as it is done with the vein of the leg;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be stopped, nor cooled or heated in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is clear.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if it is necessary to cauterize for a disease or by habit, let us do this every hour during the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are many who, when they have to go out, feel heavy-headed.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if it is true that they feel a pain in their face and head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and they thirst for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who dream, and see nothing but blood and nausea and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is the middle of the month, let us order them to be breathed on after .ii. hours in the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The remedy of the muse to help with the grief of the head ... that comes to the hairs, and it does not come until all of the body has been evacuated;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation is in the place of the remedy of the cerebral grief,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventilation is in the place of all pain or grief; and it does not come until one who has a cold complexion takes a bath or a shower, because this causes great harm to them.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and so it is not necessary for me to order them to fast, or to have cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover often, if they become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little further down due to the confusion of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The suction at the base of the neck is in place for the cure of the head and the temple, and for this reason it is effective for the extraction of stones.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to cut the channel of the prostate, and all, and to fill it up.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to push hard because if it holds too firmly, it will cause a rupture or an upset or a stomachache or pain.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The winds are a cause of great pain in the neck and head, causing blindness and headaches, and strangle-hold, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the area of the temple of the basilica; and you must order the surgeon that he press his hand upon it, so that he not cut the artery, and that he not cause a rupture of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds are a cause of great sickness in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the area of the surgeon's scalpel.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders causes disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilation of the collarbones also causes as much trouble as three veins in the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	as it brings about blood loss from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and orders the surgeon to not cut too deeply, as the ligaments are thin and can be easily cut, which would cause instability;
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse that is on the back so it touches the foundation of the hip, and the maladies of the hips, it is good that the ventouse be big and made of leather, which has the function of well milking; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg ventouses if they open widely, for they attract blood from all the body, and are equivalent to the ancient pains of the hips, and of the marital relationship, and of the bladder, and make flowers; and they are in the area of the 17th and 18th joints, and the 17th and 18th knees, but they weaken the body after a long time, and bring premature death to many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put the ventouse is that you put it first empty, and suck quickly, and place it firmly, and move evenly, and do not cease to do so, until you see the red and inflamed place, and appear the pain of the blood; then lift up, and reset the ventouses, and take care in the arrangement of the bodies, for there are some who have very thin skin, and clear pores: it is good to hurt once only, and it is good to make deep wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is big, then it is good to hurt twice: the first time to soften the way of the blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick, then one must hit the third time; and when we want to suck out the blood little by little, then we must press hard just once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to suck out the blood often; and if it is very thick, then one must hit fully, and the end should be that the wound be pierced suddenly,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and cover with oil those who have thick and tough skin, and who are prone to rust, so that you apply the leeches' oil, which is aperitive and solvent:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in the east, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of gourd seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in an apple tree, of oil from kale, or of larkspur, or of chamomile, or another similar thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take red oil, or balsam oil, or caraway oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the person who needs to be treated is old and has large pores, then you should not put any oil on them.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	But it is necessary to wash them after the inhalation of rosewater, or cold water, or water from a mulberry tree, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or another similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have moisture, if they get up from it, or from water of mirth, and from sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great excesses get up from old wine, or from water of sow thistle, or from anet or chamomile decoction, or similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and should not go to bed before taking a bath or bathing, but an hour or so after; and should not sleep after wind-sucking;
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he warm himself, when he needs to wind up, and when he has been winded up.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard those who are coleric, and whose temper is too quick and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	If it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranate seeds, endive, lettuce, and similar foods;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink cool drinks, and chew on straw, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexions, if they drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and cool drinks, and chew on straw, and moist meat.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and when he is about to vomit, so he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some people a time of three days or muscat before the ventilation, or after, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle in this, but it is only necessary that those who are warm drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The vents that are placed to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and on the kidney, and on the stomach, and on the belly, and the rain and the heel, because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the soles.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not make it but to attract blood from limb to limb.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	if we put on the breasts when it is healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as if we put ventosas on the belly and the buttocks to ease the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if by its attractive virtue it removes the operation, or moves away the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and in this way it acts when it is put on the liver and the pancreas when there is retained wind;
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these vacuum cups are empty for sucking so little; and never are they combined together with fire, nor any time do they wash with fresh water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in the disease of the pleurisy, and in such a way that the vacuum cup is filled with hot water or with water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the vacuum cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has .ij. inches in diameter and half a palm in length, and it has or costs about a farthing, so that it can be made for very little cost,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and of rain, so that it does not injure the patient when putting it on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a staff of wood or iron to put a candlestick hand;
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suckers of children are different from those of old people, and thin things from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And must one put this suction cup on the limb?
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	Take the candle of wax or .i. ointment, and put it under the suction cup at the root which is under the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and these two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one looks at it, if there is steam, and the suction cup is taken off;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and dip it in the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	For the suction cup which is made ready in the disease of pleurisy, there is neither verge nor pit, and it is only made ready when it is dry, and is placed on the limb so slightly.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	For the suction cups are only made ready in limbs or members where one can put suction cups because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and naked them of horses, as two or three years old, and others like them;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of using it so that when you find that they are in fresh clear water without danger, take them there;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them into a vat of fresh water, until they are familiar with it and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then dip from the vein and the wound, then rub the member until it is red, and put them in the water;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clear, and happy, if it is him or where one can put a suction cup, he puts it, because this is worth much after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	if not, raise the shoulder from there, and then of water, very well, and then press it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the shoulder hurts too much after raising the chest of the patient, so moisten .i. a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, as long as the pain subsides;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the pains multiply, so put on vitriole powder, or gall, and similar things, as long as they are relieved;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de fèves pelées, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’ardent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	And if you have more, take others without skin.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	If the skinless don't want to take it, rub the fresh blood on the place or put an needle in it.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then lay them down, and soon as they feel the blood, they get up;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see them crying, if you sprinkle a little powder of aloes and senna, or of ash, they will cry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	For in the art of medicine, and for the restoration of breaks and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the wise man will pour this powder of aloes on him, which he has never seen in any of the ancient books, nor read about in any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the art is lost in our land, for I never found any good one;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing about it, except from the ancient books, where I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly illustrated the shapes of the tools that are used, as I did in the preceding 19 chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sum of the words and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on the truth, so that those who are tried can know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twist or break comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if no thing prevents you completely, so as weakness of the corsage, or entrapment, or elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Let him not be too thin or too fat; and mild drinks three times a day, that is to say, cold joutes (juices), horseflesh and cheverel (a type of meat), and he shall drink no wine, nor mild grass drinks, and he shall not fill himself too much with food which fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt about the warmness of the abscess, or about the spread of the matter in the limb; if the sick person returns to his former government that he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with meat which makes thick food, or has viscosity, as well as cooked wheat, and rice, and beans, and pies, and bread made from milk, and cheese, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For thick food retards healing and the fracture more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of old and frail people cannot heal or harden according to their nature from the lack of members, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but do not cure, go back to the broken bone. i. large tendon that heals and joins the limb together as much as it can; and does not heal at all, and for this reason it is necessary to grow a lot of flesh, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that there are various types of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot, or of the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all about fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a crack that goes with the sawing, and another with sharpening, as with the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a crack with a wound, and a crack makes a small slit.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each has its own tool for repair, and its own special device, according to what comes to mind in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the bone break is caused by a twist, and open well from the side, and pressed by the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or stretching of his back, and the patient does not feel great pain unless there is some fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have twists, or a split, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you only move it by hand, but then gently hold it in place with medicine that comes later, and then firmly hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that has been torn in two, and its two parts are separated, now you must make them equal in length, as well as the appendages come together.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the abscess is heated, let it rest for no time, until the abscess is healed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then cut it evenly at the base so that you can cut it easily and cleanly, and know that its recovery is easier than that of those where parts are cut off; then restrain it, as will be shown later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if its extension is of .ij. parts, whether it be hand or foot, or a small member, or .ij. strings, or a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you should take care not to damage them by your work, and make sure that by your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and well set together the 20 bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if he is set well together, and do not pull it too hard, do not press it so as those who make it come by their work, hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in order, so teach well the patient that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, not even a little, and it is necessary to put him in a position so that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and be careful that he is put correctly, so that no twisting comes when he is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I understand that the broken members are various in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, like arms and legs and others: if it is necessary to wrap them in linen garments soft and thin.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those who are fat, like thigh and leg: if it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and stiff linen, for the wide linings embrace all of the large member, and hold it equally from all sides, so that there is no gap;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap them lightly, three or four times around the member, and tighten slightly, so that there is a small gap at the top of the wrap, then move the wrap up from the break, and loosen slightly, so that the break moves a little way;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the linen slightly, little by little, until you press a large part of the member: then take one more linen and wrap it quickly around the broken area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	and return to the sore part of the fracture, and hold it slightly, not too strongly or too gently, as we said in the first hour above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	and place between the threads of linen or canvas, until it is all even, and then tie it well above .i. bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or swelling, put something soothing on the abscess, and let it rest for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	and then straining upon your splints, and let it rest for a while, or a piece of rope, or a beam, or palm branches, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the steel that one puts on the fracture is a little thicker and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and is also far from the member of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then tighten on the steel with the same force that you used in the first ligature, then tie it with a thread running parallel to it, as you did in the first ligature;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	Then loosen it slightly, less than before; and the thread should be thin, not too thick nor too thin, and made of linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if they are thick, as I have seen in the works of the foolish, who make their ligatures with linen threads that are twisted, and this is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should be no less than two inches between each string.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the nails of the stones after extraction in his healthy limbs, then sew them with linen thread or a piece of woolen cloth so that he does not get bruised.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the rain, and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure here after.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to extract stones from all the members the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not convenient to put on the clothes before after v. days or vij., or more according to the degree of pain in the aposteme hot suddenly coming;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	And see here the manner of the ancient apothocaries to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist: and it is that you take flour which stays on the walls of the mill, and confound it with much egg, and put this preparation, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the apothecary restoring the fracture to many dispositions, most especially to women and small children, for it is not too sharp nor too rough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of apothecary that restores the fracture and dislocation and twist: take zabar and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, 10-20.; mirr and aloe, 5-10.; alepochaim 7-9.; and grind them into a powder, and mix them with much egg; if the composition of the hum is hot, then use this apothecary, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and serves many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of apothecary that serves for twist: take mugat and viscose, 10-20.; mirr and aloe, 7-9.; acacia 6-8.; armeniac resina 10., and grind them well, and confound them with egg or much egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Other methods of applying plaster to joints and osseous dislocations from their places, and soothing the pain that arises, and the sawing of the bone, and the breaking: take another novel, and moisten it with easy water and oil cooked, and put it on its place. These plasters do not return, but they are good for soothing an abscess hotly, and properly relieving the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for restoring broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of applying plaster to the restoration of a broken bone and for soothing the remaining part of an abscess: take roots of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, flours of times, each in proportion; grind them, and confound them with wine, and heat the members, and apply the poultice with coriander water moistened, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of applying plaster, more effective than the first one, for the restoration of the member in case of an abscess that persists: take roots of mallow, linseed, borage, melilot, and wormwood, and violet flowers and chamomile, each in proportion; grind them, and confound them with brine or soft water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its need for rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb anything but oil and wax made of honey and nothing else, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken limb dry things a little warm, as mirrors and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to prepare an ointment that is good for lesions and pain: take mugwort and oats, or feathers of an owl, and honey, and string, equally, and grind them, and make an ointment with it and put it on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then let the patient lie a little while, and take care that he feels no pain or that his bones do not move from their places; if he does not, let him lie by hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or itchiness, or no rest or swelling, if you hurry, and remove it, and apply the poultice now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea-water moist, and dip into the water, and lift up the place, until the itchiness ceases, and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet in water or rose-oil, and bind it on with a bandage, until you are sure that the abscess is warm;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the member rest, and be relieved of pain, then begin again gently, and a little bit of plaster, and do not remove it too strongly as before; and gently until it is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have to plaster and bind it; if it begins again, as you did before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is no movement in the limb in any of those that we have said, only after two to three days or five or six; and never more than ten days, according to what one sees, until the fracture sets, and the adjustment of the carriage on the cart approaches.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then you must restrain it more than first, and let him fatten his flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the head is drying up more than it should, know that there can be no movement.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then let him rise each time from warm water, and let him rest for a day, and wash it with salt water;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this treatment, certainly cut off the member, and gently put it back in place: it is bad, and if it is very painful, I see no other way than to let it heal without treatment.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways to break it, and they come in various shapes, and the causes are divided;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For it is broken by the impact of an iron sword, and the collar bone all the way to the shoulder socket, so that it is torn as if by a hook or pole; and for this reason this type of break is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	For the sword pierces the bone from above, and this type of break is called an "absolute" break; and the wound from these two great breaks or one small break is deep.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a knock, or a chip, or a hole in the stone, or a seat on the stone, or others like them.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that pierces almost to the bone, which is on the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that pierces into the bone as fine as a hair, and this fracture is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by a seat, or by a similar thing, and it enters the bone, and the nail is so fine as to enter like the blacksmith when he works on the cauldron; if it enters the bone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this one had more of his head wet with rain, like a child's.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and has all these kinds of injuries that small pieces of wood are feared as they are; and I will speak about its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	and let's know all kinds of injuries by traction on them, and inquiry at tents, and by the cart that is on it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by what one does when he discovers the bone, and rubs it up, so that the break is black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, take care of the accidents of disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of food, loss of understanding, stretching, paleness, feverishness, or hairs growing out and turning red, and other similar things in many conditions, it cannot be cured with doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the break comes first to you, and it is wintertime, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day at dawn.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in springtime, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day at dawn, so that the decay of the bone does not cause the accident that we have described.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone is only to the skin that covers the skull, then you must split the broken part so: and it is that you press on the head of the patient before, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the blood comes out with the discovery of the bone, or an abscess, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with wet linen dipped in oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calm, and are sure of the blood coming out; then you begin to cut off the bone, and it is made according to 21 ways: one way is that you chop at the narrow end in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then take another more generous cut than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different sizes of needles, some long and others short, pointed, and made of iron; and in working lightly, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and strong, it is necessary that you pierce it from within, so that you bring the needles with twines, not perfectly so that they penetrate beyond the bone of the temple, and must have on top of the point a margin or i.i. circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, so that each comes in its place at the end of the bone, so that you have twines for all test; and this is the form of the iij. ways of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing inside the bone is that you put 1. needle on the bone, and turn back your two hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put another hole a little farther away, and so do all around, then cut off the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or in any of the tools that you have such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the skull.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and worked on the bone, if it is necessary that you retain the aperture that is left of the bone in any instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be more soft and finer than the other incision;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it has not broken any small bones or scalps, but only slightly damaged the tools; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of working if it is that which Galen says, which is better; and he heats it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break is open, so that when you have discovered that part, you will place the tip of this lens-shaped incision there, from which it gets its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and is the part turned towards the bone, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then make a small mallet above it, so that you hit the bone lightly all around, and be well guarded against the splint that has been cut;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone break does not pierce all the way down to the marrow, and the bone is cut only a little from above, and there are small pieces, then recognize that sharpness, and shave off the scales with a sharp razor that you must have in various quantities, so that you can apply them in each case most appropriately, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have a great many sharp razors, and then some even sharper ones, and never stop doing this as long as it is necessary.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and slight breaks, you must consider how it matches up; and this is something that has not yet been fully explained to those who have set their studies in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the patient is covered with a blanket of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and he wet it in oil and puts it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another linen cloth, doubled, or triple, and wet it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do it more lightly than you can, so that you do not harm the medicine, then apply a second, lighter cloth, and do not strip it off until it has tinged the wound only;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it like that for a day or two until the abscesses are calm, then remove it, and apply medicines to it as if they were roots of herbs, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and all kinds of spices, and similar things; and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines to it immediately without any biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and be sure that the wound is clean, so you do not leave it with the ointment, nor let any bowels mix with it, for when the bowels gather together over the cloth of the skull, if they corrupt and pollute, they bring great harm to the patient; because when you put the biting medicine on top of the wound, if it is mixed above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, so that no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackenings come to the patient only because of the medicine put on him, which has virtue, then you should squeeze one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glues a single cloth with it, and lay it on his disease.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat him in the manner that seems right to you, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	He also knows that no part of the nose has ever been broken, or if one has, because it is made of cartilage and will not break unless forced or twisted, and then it will heal.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the 19 parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your little finger or a pin in its nose, and make an even cut inside your little finger, and at the knuckle by the side, until the nose returns according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the two cannot come together, then it is necessary that you put a small piece of wood at the top of the nose equal to the width of a ray of light.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then repair it otherwise, and hasten to restore the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you patch one place with another, if it breaks, and the drapings are large enough to fill the openings of the neck:
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that there is no restoration unless the drapings are wet with the juice of oak-apples and powder from a mill; then leave the patch in place until the bone has hardened, and the cartilage has become stiff.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never patch with goose feathers in place of drapings, and if there is suet between the drapings, and if it holds fast, and breathes on the sickness; or make a shell of it.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses develop, as you do, put tar or cotton wet with oil or a little of hydrastis.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not develop, put an ointment made from flour and incense powder, cooked with honey, then put it on light poultices, and do not bind the wound.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable tools for this purpose, then cut the fracture, and cure things that hinder breathing, and bandaging, if with ointments and oils suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no pain inside the nose, if he cures the bruises, and puts a plug of wax, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	about the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, the break is not very deep, nor does it break into two pieces, except that it may be bent inwards, if one takes care not to do so gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side of the jaw, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient from the right hand; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, insert your index finger from the left hand, gently push the break inside, and make it even with the other hand from outside, pushing lightly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is in the middle, you should make an extension of half a finger's width, making it even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	Et si les boucles du poilz s'en allent ou s'affinent, alors il faut attacher le feu-couteau à la base jusqu'à ce que les cheveux poussent; et si quelqu'un gratte sa peau, il faut serrer les yeux pour ne pas bouger tant qu'ils poussent.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if the hair strands fall out or become thin, then attach the fire-scraper to the base until the hair grows again; and if someone scratches their skin, squeeze the eyes shut so that they don't move while they grow again. And if you see that the figure has changed, if you wait three days, then reset what has changed; and apply ointment, powder from the mill with much egg or flour of sesame seed, after you have taken out the scraper; and apply another light ointment, and if the ointments work, and the patient's disposition does not change, leave it alone as long as it is healthy; many times it becomes healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses burst, then do what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, then remove the piece of bone that is broken; if it is subtle, use the appropriate instruments for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then make it larger with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is no delay, then dress the wound, if it is wide, and put on it plasters suitable for this, to keep it clean, as long as it is healed.
de la forcele	carefully
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	carefully
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparence ne chevement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to extend further, then put a round spear of cloth or other material on the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and gently stretch the broken force, and hold the spear with your hand, so that you make equal the fracture, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the broken bone at the end, for it comes out perfectly, then it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and put the shoulder .i. ear-side down, and lower the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone's end is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then arrange the fracture on both sides, and if you find it difficult, then split it; and pull the pieces gently apart, and if the bone cannot be joined together by any means, then place this instrument over one of the incisions that you have made; but put the spear over the medicine.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and appears like a spoon, and is not a hair, and is also wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has 1 . 2 . teeth, as you see, and one is wide, and the others are narrow, just as is the split in the wound that you made when you broke the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure that the abscess is hot, if the split is small, or if you doubt about the hotness of the abscess, if it covers the wound with drape and tent, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you dip 1  . 2  . drape in oil and in water and in wine, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The dislocation of the bone, when it is painful and there are bruises, is that you put on the bone the powder from the mill and saffron, and lightly put staples on it, and put a spike in the assembly, if you need one.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	puis prenez une très grande bande d'une palme de large, puis mettez .i. drapeil double sur les épaules, et l'empâtez; puis prenez un étole souple de .iij. doigts de large et de long, et l'enveloppez autour de celui le bandeau, si que la tête du bandeau soient pendante;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	then take a very large band of an arm's length wide, then place.i. drapeil double on the shoulders, and empaste it; then take a thin towel of 1.iij. fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that band so that the head of the band is hanging; and put the towel on the break, and turn the band over the neck, and fasten the breastplate safely, and fasten the breastplate to the malady; and let them go from each part, and when you see that the time holds the band in front, and you see clearly that the towel does not move over the broken bone, then reward everyone every day, and when the ties loosen, if restrain them;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the sick person sit on their back, and put it on when they sleep.i. small shoulder from under the breastplate, to lift the shoulder in height; so that the break will be light by the alignment of the shoulder, where you tie the band around the neck, and do not remove them unless a bad accident comes, until .xx. days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then begin the empaste again, if you see it necessary, and fasten it and leave it alone until it is restored; and it is restored in no more than .xxviij. days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	of dislocation of the shoulder
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if there is a piece of the bone forward, and do not cut off the curve, then make it hot and make the joint calm as we said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of dislocation of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The pains are never broken in the middle, but they often break at the ends; and when they are broken in the middle, if they incline to the side, it causes great pain and lack of breath, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bones, and smells good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The broken bones should be made to lie in a certain way, and placed between the shoulders, then pressed together, and the ribs of the two sides joined with hands, and carefully put back into place, as well as possible, so that the bone takes its proper shape; then wrap it in a thin cloth, and cover it with salt (or another light substance), and wrap it up, and fasten it to the bone, so that it does not move, and turn the bandage smoothly round the back, and tighten it, and loosen it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if it needs to be taken off, because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or swelling, hurry and take it off, and remove the lining, and treat that part in a certain way; then put back the lining, and tighten it until it is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Says that the rib breaker does not come except in large leaves behind the back, and towards the top, and do not bend unless they are bright; and the smell is good to the inquiry on two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And if it is necessary, make the break even. And then put on the plastron, and hold it with a staunch, if you need one.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break in the ribs is inclining inward, then feel the patient's great pain and throbbing, as if he were crying out; for the bone pokes the membrane, and it causes him to shudder and vomit much blood, and this is a sign of great illness, and the old have a great danger.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if among those who serve it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push back the break.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this because heated abscesses do not come, unless it has come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if there is pain, then the health.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that one should put leeches on the spot, to suck out the evil, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless there is doubt that the leeches will not draw the excesses to the site of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that one should cover the spot with another moist thing in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the area equal, then it is cured of the plague, of meat, and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain at the point where the tendon is stretched, then there is doubt about the patient; therefore it is necessary to split the bone on the spot of the broken rib, and put there 11 tools in oil, and because of this the medicine is good; and after that, one must cut the bones, and pull them lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure with poultices, until he is well. And if the abscesses come, therefore put there drapelz moistened in oil, and put on the spot; and cure the patient who has an abscess, and let him rest on the cost where it hurts, until he is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes breaking at the oss of the neck, and that there was not pain; and too to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you can know if he will be healed or not, if you see his hands become soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with an needle, if they feel pain. Know that there are deadly things in many dispositions, and that if they mute and feel pain when they are stretched, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if you put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you can know if he will be healed or not, if you see his joints are softened, and if the accident that is in his hands, and on his back it wind up and excretes without a will; and when you have soothed it on his belly, if it exhales without a will. And when it is soothed on his back and he clenches, he cannot. Know that this is deadly: do not work any more in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then it is a lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is such that if he has an abscess, put oil of rose or oil of mouse on it until it is calm; then put it on a poultice of cloth, and tie it with a string, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain until he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, cover it with poultice; and set the bone back in place, then bind it with cloth, and cure the wound with oil of assafoetida, until it is well; and if the chié de la kowe (meaning "knee" in Old French) is dislocated, hold your pouchet (a small bag or pouch) in your left hand, and place it against the other hand at your knee, then put on the bandage, and if there is a dislocated bone, push it back into place, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip bone is broken, and if so, there will only be a little reduction in the head; and let it grow long, and bend towards the back, and bring great pain to the patient at the site, and swelling, and inflammation wherever it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the reset if you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know what the break is and its shape; and if the break is at the top, then make that break even as much as it can be in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, and it declines inwardly, then make the patient walk on his stomach as much as the reset of that break is presented to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if it is on the outside, then put it on a beam of wood or timber, and reset the break so that it does not move; and fasten the joint to the sides, as much as the place is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess breaks out, if it doesn't burst, as long as the abscess is calm, and put what we have said above; and then return to restoration, and hold it back as it should, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And let be .ij. chaps .ij. strong, and let them up, and chop the sick on .i. side; then let him fall some arms broken on the beam, as long as he comes to leave, and take me a basket of wood, then let them up any heavy thing or his ministers extend down; then put the mirrour the breaker equal to its hands together, until the breaker returns so as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one sinner sick on his shoulder, and ties the hand to its neck, then orders 2 ministers that one of them holds what is on the breaker at its hands, and the others hold down all i. member, and extends each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten 1. member of the breaker, and on the breaker, and extends each of the ministers to its part. And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, it should be that you put 1. member in the middle of the breast, and 1. other towards the foot, over the breaker; and also if the breaker is near the foot, it should be that you put 1. light member, without effort, as long as the breaker is equal to its place, and on its side; then set the breaker equal, as it should, and tighten it, unless apostemes feet come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if apostemes feet come, then do not tighten it yet until 2. days, and put on another moist thing and rose oil, as long as the apostemes feet are calm; then tighten it, and the way to tighten it is that you put the plaster on the breaker, then assemble the arm on the support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the side; and put the drapeil, and tighten on the support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a good position, unless something prevents it, or its bone is broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use of props, and place on the fracture a prop wider and stronger than the others, and put between each prop .i. two of space, and let each prop be so large that it passes the fracture 2.3. two of each part; then draw up on the props, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the fracture, more firmly and less by pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the props and the drawing up, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and doubt the incision warm, let it lie tied for seven days, as we have said; then examine each 2.3. days of the ligature, that the pruritus does not flare up or come to the place where the member is too tight. If it heals, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accident comes, do not undo it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put a clean cushion of equal wool on the dislocated member, and examine each hour during the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move or become soft; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat which we have mentioned before, in this manner so that the meat is at the first thin layer; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. It is customary that the prop and the leg should be recovered in 20 days; and then it must be undone and wash and administer medicines of ointments for the healing. And if the stiffness is deep and blocked, delay to undo it 1 day or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of .ij. bones, which are called the "fospeles," one being small, and that is next to the wrist; and another is large, and that is opposite it, towards the little finger; perhaps a break may occur in the large fospel alone, or in the small one, and possibly both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fospel is broken, the cure is easy and the healing takes place quickly; but when the large one is broken, there is great pain, and it takes longer to heal than when both are broken at once. If only the small fospel is broken, the necessary thing is to extend it slightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	If only the large fospel is broken, then it must be stretched more forcefully; and extend it on .ij. cushions, and turn the wrist so that the palm faces upwards, with the fingers spread out and the little finger pointing upwards, so that the patient does not feel any pain; then extends the minister's arm to the dislocated part at its side, or with a bandage, and another minister at the other end above it. And then make the arm even according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, each one be put in its place, and if there is none that takes hold of it so that it goes out, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do you make it on top of the bone, as we have said above.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking into pieces there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the restoration of the broken limb there are abscesses, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; take care.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Now if some bad accident comes to the limb, such as a boil coming to the limb, it is conveniente that you dip the limb in hot water, until the boil is relieved; and let the limb rest without being cramped. And then begin again with the strapping, and if there are any loose joints or seems, so deal with them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it is not possible for the member to return on its own because it is too tight, then you must soften it gradually and leave it in that state for a few days until the swelling passes and then hold it firm.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if neither of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not loosen it until 20 days have passed. At that time, he will take off his hand from his neck, and let his neck be even, and keep it motionless and inactive, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture has healed in 60 days or perhaps in 50 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on both sides there are few fractures, and only a little pain comes many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or rained on, it is necessary that the patient should cut across, and sit equally straight before him; then he puts his hand on the table extended, and extends the broken members, and sets them equal to the mirror, until they are well joined; and applies the plaster and the stapes; if there come no abscesses, then he puts a straw according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1.i. linen drapes.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the splinter is between the loins of the plant of the hand, then he makes a staff of drapes, and instructs the patient to remove it from his broken hand; and then he draws it out with a long drape, and the straw of the staff is as large as the plant of the hand, and he draws it out, just as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the splinter is on the side, then you put a staff on top of it, and another under the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then you tie it tightly around the hand, and tighten the bond between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the splinter comes on one of the two sides, if it is in the index, then he makes it equal, as it is necessary; and ties it with the plant, and if you see that there is another splinter, put a small staff straight to lift the splinter, and do not move it; and if the splinter is on the other two sides, as in the index or the other one, then he makes it equal, and ties them together in 1.i. holding, so that they do not move, or you put one on top of the staff, as if to pout; and take care in the restoration and the disposition of aposteme, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the wounded
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	the wound is often torn, and we can see it clearly when it comes back before and behind; and the restoration is therefore such that if you lie on it above the tear, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister his link equally to his part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the cuisse, so one of the links towards the knuckle, and the others turn the break; and since it is near the kneecap, and then are the links of the knee, and the extension downward; then put the mirror the bone equally to its 2 hands, according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the link, so that the 2 achilles tendons do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed, then return to your work and your treatment; the time is right in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed, then return to your work and your treatment; the time is right in some way. Wrap a bandage with tension on the break  .i. bend over double in .ij. or .iij., and let the excess fluid go, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of birth, and put 1 long thread between the thigh and the leg, freeing the knee from the socket, and bring the chief of the thread up; then turn on the leg and bandage, then put staves on the break, and put a staff on the bone of the leg; then employ the tension gradually 1 or 2 twists on the break; and as you go higher on the break, and less tension; then tie the two threads that you have put between the thigh and the leg, and lie 1 or 3 staves that are over them, then return to the socket at the chief of the thread, until you come out from under the foot; and tension, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then if there is no swelling, no abscess, nor any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it comes off and turns towards that which comes off, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, if possible, let it be; and if it cannot be caught, then split the place and draw firmly; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no leg should be broken where staves are put, as in the arm; however, when restoring it, do not wake up the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the cut is healed after one day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the heel
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	For in the heel there is sometimes a slight injury, but it often heals many times over. And if it injures, it is only a crack, or a hole, and if it hurts, it is good; that is how it feels.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing if it is put together what is round about it, even though it is not assembled well; then put plaster on it, and put a round staff there if you need one, and hold it as it should be held, then provide for each accident what is appropriate to it, as for the chaut and other things; put in place what belongs to each injury, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Saiches that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right not "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and the break is the same as that of the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and one sees it well; and return desoz. Then bring extension, and make it equal, and bind the stars evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are more pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take .ij. wands of fust that shade the leg on one side and the other, and are long of the leg from the knee to the heel; then wrap them in .ij. leus .i. bands above and below, and bind this ligature in the middle, and at this ligature cannot the leg decline to the right or left, and so is good; and no one administers .i. wands of fust, and it is made of wood, and I put the leg to ward off movement, and properly do I make this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or some other accident; and cure as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but the bone of the foot comes in many fractures and both ways, and it never happens that it comes just fractured in one position.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see these bones sovrapposing one another, put this patient as if he were dead on the ground, also as if he wanted to walk; then now put your foot on its side, where those bones are raised up, then press them down until they come back into their places; then apply the plaster and stamp it on, and place a small tablet of plaster in the belly of the foot; then fasten this patient to the front of the foot, then because you have wrapped drapes around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days are past, if the swelling has gone down, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them, as we have said in the case of the hand; then put a stake according to the length of the two bones, and make it a little wider, then place the small tablet of plaster on the foot as I said, and fasten it onto the front; and if there are more than three or four, broken, put a stake according to their quantity, wrapped in one or two drapes of linen, and fasten the tablet behind the foot; and may it be under the belly of the foot, so that it is well covered.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget any of the other things that I have said about broken members, as soon as we have spoken about it; and attend to each accident as it occurs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	the break of the bone of the shoulder with a sharp blow
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the woman's natural bone is broken, if she is seated and elevated, then lean her back on the chest, and hold her there; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much hay as I.xx. (70) bushels; then turn the woman over, and pound her back little by little, and then remove the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the wound, and the bone returns with the hay; and when she urinates, if the hay is removed, and when she has urinated, put it back, and so do this.xx. (100) days or more: so the break will be healed, and she will recover, take a bladder of lamb's milk, and tie a cord around the navel, and pour all the milk into the wound; then blow on the cord forming, until the milk is gone inside: so the wound will heal; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the hand of the man or woman is broken, if it is restored as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these breaks are not hidden from him who sets his mind on their cure, and listens to my book. For the break signals to many people the right way to restore: hear it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the throat, when it is broken, take a bladder of swan' s milk and fill the throat with it; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it like that for xx.  (3) days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	from fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	for those who have fracture with wound, even if it is great, as the bones of the chest or shoulder or similar, must be healed now, so that the healed ones whom we have described testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, if the vinegar restains, then you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in this very hour, or that day, unless the abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses come, then leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm, and do not touch them or go to the third day or fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek as the blood is uncovered; so that you should put your hand to it lightly with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal in length so that your hands may be put together lightly, then take this instrument of iron, which has 2.5 or 3 inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to apply it to the part that needs it in each cure of a broken nose; and let it be thin and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member with your ovraige, and is pointed at the front, and thick in the middle, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And this is called a "palainche," because the broken bone should be placed on top of the head of the bone that appears; and it is struck once, until it heals, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is small, and the instrument cannot take hold of the bone properly, then you must chop off the head of the bone as much as the instrument can manage.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if you use an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, in your power; then re-cut that which is damaged in the bone with roughness and small chips.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the jaw is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. If you do so that it is in its place, then wet .i. a cloth with red wine, and properly wash it if it is dirty; and do not put it on the wound covered with wax or anything else that has oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer balm when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap it all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not tightened along with the break; and many times they have done this foolish thing, and have brought it on the sick, or dead, or腐敗したことがない;そして、他の骨折よりも柔らかく、もっと柔らかくする。
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that bad accident has come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not good to put on anything but hard things; wrap it around instead of splints, with hard cloths, and bind it. And when you see after 1 day or 2 days that the wound is broken, take off what you have put on it all together, and put on the ointment that heals wounds, as the ointment of tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen the member 2 times a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and whole.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowstring runs lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if there is a bone that has come loose, and it cannot be fixed but comes back together with the help of the bowstring, so that there are small pieces of bone, then you should stitch up the wound, and take out all these troublesome pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, then you should treat it according to what is said in the chapter mentioned above. And if the bone is broken and has opened up on the limb, as with the hip bone or shoulder blade, or similar bones on the main limbs, do not pull it out, for many die if this is done too soon; but leave it until it has putrefied; then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruses that come from the sudor
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come again and again to the health of the broken, most of all when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance it cannot do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then that we are fresh: if you administer medicines stinging, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcicole, for example, or other things like them; so that you do not squeeze any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine stigmata, or with a lot of egg yolk, or with honey; and put them on the knot in piles, and tighten them well, and do not release them for many days; and then loosen it, and start again, until the knots are hard; or you hold it on a piece of leather well made; because the property of leather is that it hardens all swellings on the limbs; and if the knot has become hardened like stone, it needs to be cut open, so that the excess appears, or you have it cut by a barber, as long as it is hard, and heal it as soon as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	For when the bone is healed, and the members remain weak and slender, for one reason: because they were too tightly tied, and were not tied as they should have been; or because there are too many ties, and cannot come to the member's aid; or because of too much swelling; or because of too great movements, not in their due hour; or because there is little blood in the body, so it becomes weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the frame soft, as long as the pains multiply in him; and he administers baths, and gives him joy and pleasure; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and drench it often with fresh water, until the swelling runs to the limb; and recover its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member is twisted after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely new, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these treatments are blamed, and they bring about great evil, and perhaps death; however, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, it is good to immerse them in warm water, or herbs that soften, such as vismove leaves, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make an ointment of softener, such as a well-made dye, and take the muscatel juice of vismove, and confit it with ghee fat or oil of sesame, and make an ointment; or you take ripe fig newts, and grind them with hay from colon, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And no bone is kneed to rub continually and for a long time with moist hands. And let there be movement in the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is stiffened and hardened, as in the stone, then it must be opened by fire, covering to the bone, with a sharp knife lightly; and put on tar and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	I will continue with the translation:
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs at any joint, now is the time to bring back the shoulder to its proper place without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, and the blood increases, and by chance one sets it back to its place when inflamed; for in this way one cannot move it at all, and it causes great pain and other troubles.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when it arrives, if one makes the patient rest, then leaves him as the abscess calms down; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then move it lightly, and heal each limb as it comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the treatment of dislocations of the shoulder to the depth of a pie.
des mandibules	of the mandible
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	may be dislocated and how they are to be reset: that is, either they are slightly out of place and become stiff; or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the chest, causing the saliva from the mouth to flow uncontrollably and making it impossible for one to close their mouth, and enveloping the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return them through a series of nine movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete, then you must reset it in the hospital, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this way that the ministers wet the head of the disease, and pour the mirrhe out of one of his hands in the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, the dislocations are .ij. parts; and the other two of the hands should be away, to make equal; and command the patient that he softens, his jaws, and moves them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirrhe met in a flat manner, until it returns in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is brought back, at the same time that the two jaws are together, if they are brought back with hot water and oil, until they are brought back lightly; do not delay in bringing them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with a mollifier, if placed on drapes wetted with oil made from rose water and wax, then lay it lightly while it still moist;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between 15.2 inches, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor make any effort to improve, but eat light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws have opened.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then eat lightly, and do not work at opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the 15.2 jaws cannot be set back to their place in an hour, and are not set correctly, then fever and usual acute diseases come, and perhaps a solution of the abdomen, and perhaps vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of death; and many die who have this in seven days.
de la forcelle	from the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	the shoulder cannot dislocate from within the continuation of the rib and the hip, and is dislocated once at the end, and you feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the joint with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head that is toward the chest cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates once, then return it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place, and instructs the patient to rest until he is healthy;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the head of the shoulder is brought back first.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Says that the shoulder dislocation only occurs in three ways: either because of the upper part of the joint which moves out of its place; and the second is because of the lower part of the joint; and perhaps it will move out from above, and this happens a little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and never dislocates from behind the shoulder, and never dislocates from within because it hurts; and many times it dislocates from above towards the joint, especially in those who have a little character, for at that time it will be hospitalized; and in those who have enough character, let it go, and return to its place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And at times there is a noise or a crack in the shoulder of some man, and it swells up with heat from an abscess, and he thinks that it has been dislocated by him.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is then necessary for you to test this, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And the dislocation is caused when it turns upward toward the shoulder, and he makes a distinction between the diseased and healthy shoulder, and you will find between them manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And at the head of the shoulder there is a hollow, and tie the shoulder to the neck at the top of the shoulder, as if it were one; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, or make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and if it is dislocated upward, then not even hidden, for you will see it clearly on the back.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation cannot be used when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the minister's hand leaves the sick man's top, then puts the patch over the joint, and pushes the joint upwards to its place; and the minister's hand, and extends it upwards, then takes it off; so come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it doesn't come as we have said by daybreak, then the sick person must be bathed in warm water; and the minister provides a soothing and softening infusion, as if of alth and fenugreek and melilote in water, and is provided;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then have the patient lie down on his back, and place a shoulder under the body of another person who is equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, then put the foot of the ill person on this support, and gently lift the shoulder blade with care, and draw the sick hand away.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	And others ministers shall take the shoulder of the ill person, so that he does not move downward; this shoulder comes back immediately, and we have shown you how to do it in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and is that you make present .i. a man who is greater than the ill person; and is facing the side of the body, and puts the shoulder under the support of the ill person, and lifts the support upwards, so that the ill person hangs in the air:
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And others ministers draw the sick hand downward toward the stomach. And if the ill person is too light, then put something heavy on them, and the dislocation will come back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And he returns it in another way: and this is how you make a long piece of wood in the earth, with which the head is held as if it were a pistol, and is not too large nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then place the patient on his back, but cover him with a blanket; and extend his arm out to one side, so that the joint returns to its position with care.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a piece of wood two arms long and three hands wide, which has the head resting on it so that it can enter perfectly into the socket, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then place the wood on top of the head with the drape so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it into the socket; and extend your arms up the wood, and hold the joint on the wood, and put the hand on the side of the head, then place the arm down one side of a block of wood, and extend the hand down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now come back.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in any way that it is, you must put an equal ball of wool on the shoulder, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and alumen of oven, all over the shoulder and back, then strain out the ball forward, and return the ligature to the plaster, and embrace the hand at his neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that he suck a little, until the members are comfortable, for he will heal sooner; and then suck more after one or two days, and move him; and if he is firm and has not become soft, he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place because of moisture or some other reason, you must give it four dosages of the tincture, if as it is put before or the chapiter of the tinctures.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it does not improve after one or two days, and the joint does not hold up, and cannot raise its arm straight, then you know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and you know that the joint has never been set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes greasiness to the member, and delayed movement, then the patient often uses, until that greasiness is cured, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	from the dislocation due to moisture
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	When the joint is dislocated due to moisture, and dislocates again at the same place, and dislocates in all directions, especially before and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for we see it and feel it well; and dislocate according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly. For the joint is lame, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you move it so that the skin comes first, for if the skin comes first, then it would be painful to move it; and by chance it cannot be moved all at once, most of all when it is behind; which is worse than other dislocations, and is very painful, and by chance brings death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can move it, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of the person reaching towards the shoulder in turn, from behind and from the front, and press the joint to its roots together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then return when it doubles its hand back to its other hand, and press the shoulder from behind at the root of its palm where it has come unstuck.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and that is that both ministers extend the arm, and dip it in water with both ministers so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, and then you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when you see the joint of his hand, if it does not get better with any oil to soften the joint, then pour on the joint completely, until it heals;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put on dry plaster with honey, and strain it tightly, and tie the arm of the sick person to the collar, and leave it for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release it, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, then begin again with plaster and a bond, and leave it in this way for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels greasiness after the re-establishment of the joint, and it moves, then let him bathe and scrub well, and press until he is relieved; or you put on the joint a thin layer of greasy sheep's wool, then leave it there .i. a day and a night, then the bone, and let him enter or bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, rub the joint well, then put on the wool again, and then enter or bath; and do so  .iij times or 2 times, until he is healed; and if you see, put on the bottom of the boot a wet leather heated with butter, and press it on; and it will return to its place.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand should be reset quickly, even if it is still slightly dislocated; also, the joints should not be swollen or painful.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And let him ramemens so that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend its ministers hand, and mirer it makes equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bottles until it revives.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Anyway, you must look to see if it is well placed; then put the sick back of his hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the sick person's back of his hand on the table, and let the mirer put his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the retraction of painful appendages incisions, and he leaves it so untroubled.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint will be twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And do not try anything on the patient unless his hands are wet, and he cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves or arteries have been cut; if there is no other way to extract it by a delicate cautery, and perhaps nothing else can be done.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, put it on the plaster that we have described, then extract and leave it for a few days, then unpick and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no gap, then moisten it with hot water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	are never dislocated the two bones of the hand on each side, not at the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then are the two, and press the dislocation to your pockets until it comes back, then support the head of the two bones, and turn it towards the part where they are joined;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave it .ij. days, and then put it equal to this day; and of not, so com we have said, and dislocus the next day, and makes move, and relues it; and do this often, as long as it is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same if it is dislocated in the hand, and do as you have done before until it is well; and do the same if it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	do the dislocation of the shoulder on the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder or neck is dislocated, and there are multiple dislocations, there will be no cure for the patient, because death comes quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excrections come without warning, cannot be held back, and often soften one or more limbs, or both legs or arms, or both feet.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times it mutates to four parts; that which mutates behind is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The cure is that you reward it if Gilbositez has come from childhood; if there is no cure or recovery of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from sitting down or stings or similar things, the ancient ways of curing them with big words, or it has never done all great good;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have reduced it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the sickness which comes before, neither an enchantment nor a plague came.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes in the middle of the back, and cannot be cured except by that which comes properly from behind, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be extended on his back in an equal position, and has the draw out of him, so that he does not bleed;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put 1 log of fire on the head in the ground formed, and 1 other under the chest, and tie a rope between the back of the patient, and 1 other under the hips, and between the knees, and between the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two ministers know the lines, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the twenty-one torches;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the torch as we have said, and the mirror puts its hands on the spine forming, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if she does not return by this cure, then take a tray of three feet long, and cover the wall with it, and let the patient be on one side, and pour the head of the tray over the wall, then put the middle of the tray on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirror's hands on the other head of the tray, and press well, until it revives to its place; and if you see, do it with your hand that turns back;
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And that you set .ij. torches to the head of the sick in an arm of great length, and between each torch on either side, a palm of space of long length;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and let in each torch a loop or knot where the rope turns, and let the torches be firmly set in the ground so that they do not move; and between each pair of 2 torches let there be one small torch of a palm's length, so that the rope turns; and between the 2 small torches let there be one long torch, so that it turns back;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the rope that is among the 2 torches at the turn of the head, and the other rope towards the 2 torch pegs at the other turn, and each minister turns his torch at every turn of the rope, and the master sets the knot evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on dried thyme with a lot of pepper, and then the pegs, and then the wooden stake of a long board, that purple the head of the gibbet and the part of the spine healthy, then tie the rope, as we have said, and use subtle medicinal food until he is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and soothing drugs, with the stone that we have said before; and never does he administer a piece of plaster.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never does the appearance come at the base of the spine of the back, and you must think that it is dislocations; and this bone opens up, so you should not have any presumptions: by adventure it may bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and that the joints of the hip and shoulder come only due to dislocations, not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parties: inside and outside, and before and behind; and the more inside, and less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocations within is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy, it is longer, and more so the knees of the diseased than those of the healthy, and cannot the diseased double his knee with fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	is the place that is inflamed hot of abscess because this head of the shoulder comes to it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that one whose coming is ahead, is that this accident are opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that one whose coming is ahead, are that his leg is well according to the completion; however, it does not double the knee with pain, and if he is made to walk, he cannot go forward, and holds back his urine, and inflames the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the joint is softened, and the shoulder of the chest is out of place on the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And those who have this type of dislocation should be treated if the dislocation is old and it delays according to its situation, otherwise there is no cure; and it only comes that he has been presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those who have this type of dislocation, there are three ways to treat it: if you hurry to set the joint back into place, and tighten it on both sides, and move it to the left and right; maybe it will go back, but there is no other need for treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not go back in this way, you should prepare very well one minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the bedpost;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and others extend their hand over him in such a way that he holds his hands out from his sides, then he ties it to a rope tied to the chest; and others tie the head of the lasso to the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend both forward and backward at once, so that the patient is lifted up from the ground all at once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This mode of extension is common to three appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If this is not the case, then you should put your hand on the patient's back, and then tie the rope to the root of the loins, and the loop that is outside the angle, then tie the rope upward towards the angle, and upward towards the spine.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then bring others to minister to his arms, and embrace the large ball of the sick chest, and extend it outwardly with the form: so he will now come back to his place; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must bind the .ij. feet of the sick together with a strong thong over the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. knees, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other two;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it hang from the top of a beam, and be suspended above the ground with  .ij. long arms; and command  .j. minister to embrace the head of the sick person, and let others who are ministers hold the form of the sick person's chest, for the joints now come back into place quite easily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is outward, so let the sick person lie, as we have said in that which has gibbosity, and extend   .i. thong properly on the sick leg, and on the foot too;
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place 1...1...tows, 1...1...in the head and 1...1...other around the pieces, then insert 1...1...a towl between the legs of the patient to cover the shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and it is planted with wet towels inside, so that the patient does not bleed; then extend each minister towards him, and let the doctor hold his dislocated limb in place.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns to place, it is good. If not, place it on a table, and press it as we have said in the treatment of the gibbous phase, and position the patient on their side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, if it is convenient to extend the leg of the patient hospital-wise, and according to what I have said; and position the doctor his pain on top of the ill leg, then press with the other hand, and make it lie down towards the ground.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocations are on the side, it is not appropriate to extend the patient down, nor to raise up on the ground, but rather that he be placed as if he had been dislocated while lying on his side, as we have said in relation to the sleeping position on the 20th mattress.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be placed on his face, and the limb extended as we have said above, and it is necessary to press down on the joint with the hand.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be necessary when the patient extends his legs, and they are to be even; then insert the poultices, and put on the plaster, and extract a bandage, so that the shoulder joint does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for .iij. days or .iiij., then take off the poultices, and put on the plaster; and if you see that they are even, as before, and let it be. iij. days; then take off the poultices, and make him bellow, until the members are comfortable again.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the hip joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	is dislocated according to three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you command the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not move to his knee, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the treatment of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and put your back on his face, and put his foot on your knees;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee to your palms, and draw back between the two, then fold the .ij. sides of the knee from the knee cap; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knees return to their place, and the sign is that he stirs his leg well in his socket lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the paste thereon, and make the leg move to its socket, and hold it together firmly for .iij. or iiij. days, then remove it; and do not work on the patient to walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not in place, then use strong extension as we said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The talons are never dislocated, nor fully displaced, inside or out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs that this is that the ankle is dislocated, and turning away from the part where it has dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The remédes are these: if it is light, and one must gently extend it with his hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has dislocated fully, so that you sit the patient upright, and tie him down:
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	and then hold the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left .iij. times, and then raise it up, and pour strongly the foot up;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this .iij. times, as we have said, pouring and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, the work begins again, for it comes back;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot come back like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put .i. stake firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie the cloth around it, so that it does not bruise the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	and then put the ministers on the knees, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or a .i. thong, that he lay on the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and let them be placed close together beneath the patient so as to restrain the patient when they are stretched out;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the dislocated limb equally in his hands, and let other ministers dip the healthy leg in the solution, and the dislocation will return gradually to its place.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is firm, then apply the plaster and set it in place, fastening it to the leg, and keeping the nails that are behind the ankle safe, so that the ligature may not be too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then let it rest for .iij. or .iiij. days, and when the plaster has set, then remove it after three or four days; then he should not go out to work until he is quite recovered.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes forward this end, it is not yet secure that it does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses come out, so that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, as long as they are healthy.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are separated, if it is nicely extended work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on .i. the floor or on .ie. a table all upright, and put your foot upon what opens out of those joints, then press your foot with form until it regains;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and it does not open anything, so put the sole of the foot on a table with 1/2 chairs, then strain it with form, and let it be 1/3 hours, then release it; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with dislocation, and it is restored many times, often the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not proud in the remedy, then you are ignorant in the art and have not used it for a long time, and you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, nor bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply at the beginning of things soothing poultice, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if I restore now the member to its place, so that the poultice may come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, if you apply soothing poultice to the wound, as it should be, with dry ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and with dislocation, there is fracture, and small bones are dislocated, if the bone, and do as we said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and keep yourself from entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will bring you to death according to your Creator, and for the sake of protecting your soul and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Explicit the romance of physics.
