 CHAPTER SIXTY-ONE.
On the extraction of a stone from the female.
 It is very uncommon for women to have stone.
But if it should happen to a woman the treatment is indeed difficult and is hindered by a number of things.
One is that the woman may be a virgin.
Another is that you will not find a woman who will expose herself to a (male) doctor if she be chaste or married.
A third is that you will not find a woman competent in this art, particularly not in surgery.
Then a fourth is that the place for cutting upon the stone in a woman is a long way from where the stone lies, so the incision has to be deep, which is dangerous.
If necessity compels you to this kind of case, you should take with you a competent woman doctor.
As these are very uncommon, if you are without one then seek a eunuch doctor as a colleague, or bring a midwife experienced in women's ailments or a woman to whom you may give some instruction in this art.
Have her with you and bid her do all that you enjoin; first of all, in searching for the stone.
If she perceive that the woman is a virgin she should pass her finger into the anus and palpate for the stone.
If she finds it and keeps her finger on it, then bid her cut down upon it.
But if the patient be not a virgin bid the midwife pass her finger into the vulva and palpate for the stone, after she has placed her left hand upon the bladder and applied a good pressure.
If she finds the stone she should gradually push it down from the outlet of the bladder as far as she can until it reaches the bottom of the pelvis.
Then she should cut down upon it from about the middle of the pudenda near the root of the hip on whichever side she can conveniently feel it; she must keep her finger on the stone, pressing from below.
The incision should start by being small; then let her introduce a sound into the small incision, and when she finds the stone then she will enlarge the incision until she knows that it is big enough for the exit of the stone.
You should know that there are many kinds of calculus: some are large and some are small; smooth and rough; long, rounded, and pronged.
Learn to recognize these types and you will have an indication of what to do.
If you are hindered by a haemorrhage, scatter powdered vitriol on the place and keep it there for a time until the haemorrhage has ceased, and then return to your operating until the stone is out.
See also that you have ready the instruments mentioned for the extraction of stone from the male, to assist you in operating.
If you are hindered by a haemorrhage and you know, by the spurting of the blood, that it comes from an artery that has been cut, then put styptic powder on the place and bind up tightly with bandages and leave it and do not come back to it; let the stone be and do not extract it, for often that loses the patient; then dress the wound.
And after some days, when the acute haemorrhage has subsided and suppuration has set in, return to your operating until you get the stone out.
