 CHAPTER SIXTY-THREE.
On cutting for a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
 You should know that cutting for this kind of hernia has an uncertain outcome and in most cases results in death; and therefore I think it better to let it be and to safeguard the patient.
However, I shall mention the manner of operating for this and all kinds of tumour.
Now I say that many tumours arise from the bodies composing the testicles; and this from several causes.
It may be from an acrid superfluity running down into the testicles, or from a blow.
The colour of the tumour will be like that of the rest of the body and there is no water to it.
The lump will be solid and often will be stony hard, of a dark colour, and without sensation.
Sometimes also it arises from a knotting and inflation of the arteries, as has been mentioned, or from an inflation of the veins.
The sort arising from a swelling of the arteries may be recognized by a dispersal of the lump when you press upon it with your fingers; this should not be interfered with at all.
The sort arising from a swelling of the vein will not disperse when you press upon it with your fingers.
It is sometimes possible to cut down on this kind and also on the other fleshy tumours thus: make an incision in the skin of the testicles; then draw the testicle upward and out of the tunica albuginea, and free the suspensor from the vessels and tie the vessels, and cut the suspensor after you have freed it from all round the testicle.
Should it happen that the testicle is adherent to the fleshy growth, you will have to cut away the testicle itself and remove it.
But should the adhesion have formed somewhere inside the membranes or in the space between the vessels, then you must free the adhesion as a whole and cut it away with a circular incision.
If the fleshy growth should be at the site of the junction which is behind, you will have to cut the whole thing away and remove the testicle as we have said.
And when your operation is finished, pack the wound with wool moistened with oil of roses and wine; then dress in the usual manner until healed.
