 CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE.
On the cauterization of hernia.
 When a rupture occurs in the groin, and part of the intestine and omentum comes down into the scrotum, being the onset of the disease, forbid the patient to take food for one day and have him use laxatives to empty the bowel.
Then let him lie on his back in front of you and bid him hold his breath till the intestine or omentum comes out; then put it back with your finger.
Then, below the hernia over the pubic bone, mark a semicircle whose extremities point upward.
Then heat a cautery of this type.
When it is white hot and emits sparks then return the intestine or omentum into his abdominal cavity, and have an assistant put his hand over the place to prevent the exit of the intestine.
You should first have parted his legs and put a pillow under him; let another assistant sit on his legs and another on his chest, holding his hands.
Then apply the cautery to the mark, keeping the cautery upright, and hold it till it reaches the bone; or apply the cautery again a second time if it does not reach the bone the first time.
 You must take the greatest care that the intestine does not come out while you are cauterizing, lest you burn it and it result in death or grave injury to the patient.
You must understand that if you do not bring the cauterization down to the bone your operation will not be successful.
For boys the cautery should be slender according to their proportions, and for adults according to theirs.
Then dress the site of the cauterization till it heals.
After three days, treat the site of cauterization with butter until the eschar from the burn departs.
Then treat with the usual ointments till healed.
The patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may cicatrize.
Throughout the course of his treatment you must make his diet such as will be gentle with his inside, so that the intestine should not come down during the effort of defaecation.
Then when he wants to get up after the forty days, employ a tight bandage and keep this on another forty days.
He should be moderate in his exertion, his eating, drinking, and shouting.
Thus under these rules he will be completely cured.
I shall speak of the treatment of rupture by scission in the appropriate chapter.
When a rupture occurs elsewhere in the belly and is at its inception and you wish it not to grow, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery in proportion to its size; burn about two-thirds through the thickness of the skin and treat as we have said; he will be cured and the rupture will not grow.
One of the Ancients said that ruptures were to be cauterized with a three-armed cautery like this.
First mark the rupture with ink; put the transverse line on the upper margin of the rupture and the other towards the lower, and apply a single claviform cautery in the middle.
But the first cauterization is easier and better.
