 CHAPTER NINETEEN.
On turning a fistula into the nose.
 Doctors give the name 'fistula' to what laymen call 'a quill'.
When you have treated it with the cautery or with caustic according to the instructions given previously, and it is not healed, there is no clear method of treatment except to cut down on the tumour at its ripening and let out all the humidity or pus therein, till you reach the bone.
When bone is reached and you see necrosis or blackness, scrape it with an instrument like this.
It is called 'rough-head' and is made of Indian iron.
Its head is round like a button but is engraved with markings finely engraved, like those of a file or a rasp.
Place it on the site of the diseased bone and spin it between your fingers, pressing down a little with your hand, till you are sure all the diseased bone has been scraped away.
Do this several times.
Then let the place be dressed with stanching and styptic remedies.
And if the place heals and flesh is generated there and the flow of sanies is stayed and there is no return after leaving for forty days, and there is no swelling, and nothing emerges, you may know it is perfectly healed.
But if not, there is no other means for it but to turn the fistula into the cavity of the nose, in this style, namely, that you lay bare the bone a second time, either by an instrument or by caustic; and when the bone is uncovered, then take a drill like this.
Its extremity, which is of iron, should be triangular; and its wooden handle should be conical in shape, and, as you see, tapering to the extremity.
Then put it to the bone itself near the canthus; but keep your hand a little away from the eye; then with your hand rotate the drill till the bone is perforated; and the patient will have the sensation of this, since, if he holds his hands over his nose he will find the breath coming out through the hole.
And then dress the place with styptic and stanching remedies as I have taught you.
And when the flesh begins to grow and the place gets hard, the matter which before was coming outward will be turned into the nose; and this will be easier for the patient.
