 CHAPTER FIFTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of dropsy.
 We have mentioned in the section the kinds of hydrops, and the manner in which the fluid collects; the signs of each kind; and the medical treatment of them.
The only kind which is to be treated by operation is the one called 'ascites'.
But neither the kind called 'tympanites' nor general anasarca are to be treated by operation at all, for that would be fatal.
When you have been trying medical treatment for this kind, for ascites, and your treatment is ineffectual, then consider; and if the patient be in a low state or suffer from other disease beside the ascites, such as cough or diarrhoea or some such, then beware of attempting operative treatment since it will be of uncertain outcome.
But if you see that the patient has plenty of strength and suffers under no other complaint beside the dropsy, and is of neither tender nor advanced age, then the operative procedure in this case is for you to place the patient, standing, before you, with an assistant behind him to apply manual pressure to his abdomen and push the fluid down into the pelvis.
Then take a pointed scalpel of this shape, sharp along both sides, long, and very sharp at the end like a scalpel, but slightly stubby so that in operating you do not reach the intestines and damage them.
Then consider; and if the dropsy arises from the region of the intestines then you should make an incision three fingers' breadth directly below the umbilicus, above the pubes.
If the dropsy arises from disease of the liver, let your incision be three fingers to the left of the umbilicus.
If it arises from disease of the spleen, let the incision be three fingers to the right.
Moreover, the incision must not be on the side which the patient wishes to lie on, so that the superfluities may not flow to the damaged part.
Then pierce the skin with the instrument, introduce the instrument into that incision, and bring the scalpel up between the skin and the membrane, as if excoriating, over an area about the size of a fingernail.
Then pierce through the membrane till the scalpel reaches a cavity, which will be where the water is; then withdraw the scalpel and put into the opening the instrument shaped like this; it resembles a fine section of reed, made of silver, bronze or white copper; smooth and well polished, with a small opening at the lower end and three at the sides, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
Its extremity may be cut to the shape of a writing reed like this; the upper end of it is supplied with a ring.
When the instrument reaches the fluid, the fluid will at once pass down into it.
Evacuate at one time only a moderate amount of fluid; for if you evacuate more than you should at a time, the patient may die through a dissolution of his animal spirits, or he will undergo a fainting that is next door to death.
But let out such quantity of fluid as is proportionate to his strength and as is indicated to you by the patient's condition: the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his colour.
Then withdraw the instrument and keep (the rest of) the fluid in.
For it will be immediately held back by the skin that closes the opening in the peritoneum, which, as I have told you, must be perforated in that manner.
Then repeat the use of the instrument another day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and withdraw again a small quantity of fluid.
And do this daily, watchful and on guard against error, until there is only a trace of fluid left.
But if you are afraid for the patient and leave a large amount of fluids treat him by burying him in hot sand, and by heavy sweating in the bath and in the sun, and letting him go thirsty; while you treat him with drying medicines, till he is well.
He should also be cauterized on the abdomen and on the liver and spleen after the paracentesis, as I have previously described.
