 CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE.
On the removal of a leech sticking in the throat.
 When you treat a leech by the medical means spoken of in the appropriate section, with no effect, then inspect the patient's throat in full sunlight after depressing the tongue with the instrument I have described.
If your gaze falls upon the leech, pull it out at once with a small hook or a fine pair of forceps.
But if you cannot get hold of it, take a cannula and introduce it into the patient's mouth near the leech, then pass through the cannula a red-hot iron; do this repeatedly; while the patient must not drink at all that day.
Then let him take a vessel full of cold water, open his mouth in it and rinse out with it, but let him not swallow a drop of it; and he should keep the movement of the water going by hand time after time; for the leech straightway falls off when it feels the water.
If it does not come away by these means, fumigate the patient's throat with urine or with the juice of asafoetida, using the instrument described for fumigating the uvula.
Do this several times, for then it will fall away.
In fumigating, this is the way to set about it: take a pot containing live coals, fitted with a lid and a hole in the middle of the lid into which is fitted the end of the instrument.
Then put in the aromatic; and the patient should apply his mouth to the end of the cannula, with his mouth closed to prevent the escape of the vapour, until he knows that the vapour has reached his throat; for the leech will at once come away.
But if it does not come away, let the inhalation be repeated many times.
Let the patient endure his thirst, and eat salty food and garlic and drink no water.
It will inevitably be removed by this treatment.
This is the figure of an instrument for extracting the leech from the throat when visible.
It resembles forceps, as you see, except that it has this bend for entry into the throat; and the two extremities are shaped like a bird's bill, with the roughness of a file.
When they have hold of a thing they do not let go.
And another instrument with which to depress the tongue.
It is a wide ring of iron, of such a size as to go into the mouth above the tongue.
It is inserted into the mouth standing on its side, and the mouth stays open without the patient's volition; nor can he dislodge it at all until you turn it.
Inside the ring appear the words: 'The pattern of the instrument for opening the mouth; exactly of this size'
