 CHAPTER FORTY-TWO.
On the incision of scrofulous glands in the neck.
 Tumours of this kind often occur in the neck and in the axilla and in the groin; and sometimes in other parts of the body.
Those occurring in the neck are sometimes single and sometimes multiple, one arising from another; and each scrofula is contained in a capsule of its own, like the cysts and tumours of the head that we have described.
There are many kinds of these glands; some are stony, some contain humidities, some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
But those that you find by touch to be benign and are of a colour not greatly differing from the skin, freely movable in any direction, not adherent to the nerves of the neck nor to a jugular vein, nor to an artery, and are not deep-lying; these should be incised with a simple incision from above downwards, from line g to line b
 and dissect away all round and draw the edges of the skin apart with one or two hooks or with several if necessary, as we said on the subject of tumours of the head, and draw them out very slowly.
Be most careful not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve.
The scalpel should not be over sharp lest you make the incision too big, or the patient flinches and so you cut open that which does not need cutting.
If you cut a vein or artery and be thus hindered in your operating, apply powdered vitriol or some styptic powder to the wound, and bandage the wound and let be till the worst of the swelling has subsided and the opening is relaxed and threatens to turn purulent; for then the bleeding will stop.
Then return to your operation and finish it.
Then feel with your forefinger to see if there are any small glands left, in which case dissect and clean them away.
If there is a large blood-vessel at the root of the gland, then you should not cut that gland at its root but should ligature it with a strong double ligature and leave it till it sloughs away of its own accord without harm.
Then pack the wound with cotton wool previously soaked in Egyptian ointment; then continue dressing.
If you excise the whole gland, you should at once draw together the two edges of the wound and suture them, when you are absolutely certain there is nothing of it left.
But if you see that, on account of the size of the scrofula, there is still some superfluity left behind, you should carry the incision to the root and base of it, and employ suturing and the rest of the remedies mentioned.
The glands that contain humidities you should open with a single perforation where they seem to have matured; make your perforation from below, as we have said.
Then after opening use swabs soaked in Egyptian and similar ointments to do away with the unhealthy remains, till you see that the wound is clean; then dress with nourishing ointments until healed.
