 CHAPTER NINETY.
On cutting for varices.
 Varices are thick twisted veins filled with melancholic superfluities.
They occur in most parts of the body, but generally in the legs, particularly in the legs of couriers and ploughmen and porters.
First you must purge the body free from black bile, several times, strongly.
Then venesect the patient in the basilic vein.
The treatment with the knife is of two kinds: one is to incise and bring out all the black blood, the other is to draw out the vein and extract it bodily.
 The incision is done thus: the leg is first well fomented with hot water to liquefy the thick foul blood; then bind up the patient's leg well from the upper part of his thigh to below the knee; then make an ample incision into the vein in one, two, or three places.
Then with your hand press the black blood upward from the lower part and downward from the upper part of the leg and draw off as much blood as you see suffices or as the patient's strength can bear.
Then bind up, and bid him abstain from foods that give rise to black bile.
The evacuation and venesection should be repeated whenever the veins fill up again to the patient's hurt.
 Extraction is carried out in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it is very hairy; then bring him to the bath and foment the leg in hot water until it becomes red and the veins are filled.
Or if there be no bath available let him take violent exercise until the limb gets hot.
Then make a longitudinal incision in the skin over the vein, either at the upper end of it near the knee or at the lower end near the ankle.
Then with hooks open up the skin and dissect away round the vein on each side until it is laid open to view.
When it is visible you will see it red almost to the point of blackness; and when it is freed from the skin you will see it look like a cord.
Then pass beneath it a probe to lift it up, and when it is clear of the skin hold it with a blunt smooth hook.
Then make another incision near by, three fingers distant; then dissect away the overlying skin until it comes to view; then raise it with a probe as before and lift it with a second hook as you did at first.
Then make yet another incision or several if need be; then draw out the vessel at the lowest incision near the ankle and cut it through.
Then pull it and draw it out until it emerges from the second incision.
Then draw it towards the incision above that and so on until you draw it out of the third incision (or) the uppermost, until it is all extracted; then cut it off.
But if it does not respond to your attempts to draw and extract it, pass in a needle with a strong double thread and ligate it and draw it up; and introduce a probe beneath it, and twist it all round until it comes out; but be careful lest it break; for if it break the total extraction of it will be very difficult for you and harm will thereby come to the patient.
When you have got it all out, apply to the incisions wool soaked in wine and oil of roses, or olive-oil, and dress it till it be healed.
 If the varix be contorted, with twists and turns from side to side and not in a straight line, as we said, then you should cut down along both sides of the twisted part and the places where it is tortuous, then catch it up with hooks and extract it whole.
Be careful in incising over it that you do not cut into or injure the vein, for this will render the extraction difficult; therefore be most careful.
The lancet for cutting upon a varix.
The blunt hook.
It is not bent like other hooks, and its extremity must be blunt so as to not injure the vein.
It should be of a broad curve and smooth, for if it is fine-pointed its fineness may cut the vein; rather it should be quite thick, as we said.
