 CHAPTER FOURTEEN.
On setting a fracture of the femur.
 The femur is often broken, and this is readily discernible, for it will rotate forwards or backwards.
It is set by binding a bandage above the fracture and another below, while the patient lies flat on his face.
Then each assistant should make an even extension in his own direction, by the bandage.
This is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, you should tie on a soft bandage of wool or something similar, at the root of the thigh toward the groin, so that extension may be applied above, and another bandage below the fracture.
Likewise if the fracture is near the knee the bandage should be near the knee, so that extension may be made downwards.
Then the doctor should straighten it out with both hands until he has reduced it to the pattern of the natural form and the bone unites neatly.
Then you will have to apply the plaster and bandage if there is no effusion in the limb, but if there is an effusion leave it for a few days until the swelling has gone down, then resume your treatment.
 As to the bandaging, you should wrap a firm broad sash two or three times round the fracture, leaving some over; then bind the leg up so that the heel is brought to reach the root of the buttock.
Then pass a long cord in the space between the thigh and the leg, low down near the knee, and let the ends of the cord come up on either side, then bind the rest of the sash over the leg and the thigh.
Then apply splints to the thigh at the very site of the fracture and put one of the splints on the leg-bone.
Then pack soft material in the space between the leg and the thigh to make the bandaging even.
Then start with three or four turns of a strong bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture, and as you get away from the site of the fracture bind lighter and softer and looser.
Then turn to the two ends of the cord which you previously passed between the thigh and the leg, and with the cord bind the adjacent splints above, then carry the ends downward until you end up at the great tendon of the foot and with them bind also the extremities of the splints at the other end so that the bandaging will not shift from its place.
Then let the bandaging remain on as long as no pruritus or abscess or effusion or anything of that sort happens to the limb; but if any of these occur loosen it quickly and put right whatever has taken place, in the manner we have often mentioned.
If there be a penetrating fragment of the bone, you must reposition it if you can; but if not then cut down upon it and remove it and treat the wound in the sort of way mentioned previously, until it heals.
 This fracture of the thigh is sometimes bandaged without bringing the leg alongside with splints, in the way we spoke of for the humerus and the forearm.
But setting after the former manner does not cause the patient any lameness; whereas if the femur is set alone without binding the leg to it the patient will inevitably be lame for always.
You must know that the femur knits in fifty days or a little more or less, according to the different constitutions and other circumstances.
