 CHAPTER SIXTY.
On the extraction of the stone.
 We have already in the due place reviewed the different kinds of stone and the medical treatment of them.
I mentioned too the difference between stones arising in the kidney and those arising in the bladder, and gave all the symptoms of them.
I also mentioned the kind of stone to which manipulation and incision are appropriate.
This is in particular the stone arising in the bladder, and the sort impacted in the urethra.
I shall now give a short description of this with a clear explanation and summary.
 Now I say that a vesical calculus most frequently occurs in boys.
Among the symptoms is that the urine passed out of the bladder is of a thin consistency like water, and sand appears in it; and the patient keeps on rubbing and playing with his penis; and often it hangs flaccid and then is erected; at the same time many of them get a prolapse of the rectum.
The cure of boys under the age of fourteen years is easy; but the treatment of old people is difficult; and that of young men midway between the two.
And the larger the stone the easier the cure; with a small stone the cure is otherwise.
When we undertake treatment the patient must first have an enema to empty his bowel completely; for sometimes the faeces prevent the calculus being found when it is looked for.
Then the patient should be taken by the feet and jarred to and fro and shaken downwards to bring the calculus down into the neck of the bladder; or else let him jump down from a height a number of times.
Then have him sit down upright before you with his hands beneath his thighs, to make the whole bladder incline downwards.
Then examine him and palpate him externally.
If you feel the stone in the empty place, immediately hasten and cut down upon it.
But if there is not the slightest sign of it to the touch then you should anoint with oil the forefinger of your left hand if it be a boy, or the middle finger if it be a fully grown young man, and introduce it into the anus and search around for the calculus, until, when it comes under the finger, you can work it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards toward the place where you wish to make your incision.
And bid an assistant squeeze the bladder with his hand; and bid another assistant raise the scrotum with his left hand and with the other hand stretch the skin under the testicles away from the place where the incision is going to be.
Then do you take a lancet like this and make your incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in the mid-line but on the side of the left buttock; and cut down upon the calculus itself, keeping your finger in the anus and pressing it outwards.
The incision should be oblique, wide externally and narrowing inwards down to dimensions allowing the exit of the stone, not larger.
Now you may press with the finger that is in the anus upon the stone as you make the incision, and it comes out without difficulty.
You should know that sometimes there are stones which have angles and edges, on which account their extraction is difficult.
Some are smooth like acorns and rounded, and these come out easily.
But in those cases where the stone is rough and angular you should slightly increase the incision.
Then if it still will not come out you must then resort to a device— namely to catch hold of it with strong forceps having an extremity like a rasp, to get a tight hold of it so it shall not slip out; or else introduce beneath it a narrow instrument with a crooked end.
And if you then cannot get the stone out, widen the incision slightly; and if there is any bleeding stanch it with vitriol.
If there should be a number of stones first push the largest of them into the neck of the bladder, then cut down upon it; then push a smaller one down after it; and do the same if there be more than two.
But if the stone be very large it is foolish to make a great incision down upon it; for the result is that the patient either dies or has a chronic urinary fistula because the place will not heal at all.
Try rather to manipulate it so that it protrudes; or else attempt to break it up with the forceps so that you can extract it piecemeal.
And when you have completed the operation pack the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, and bind it up and apply a pad soaked in olive oil and wine or oil of roses and cold water, to reduce the swelling.
The patient should lie flat on his back and the bindings should not be undone before the third day; and when they are undone foment the place with plenty of oil and water.
Then dress it with Palm ointment and basilicon ointment until it heals.
If an increasing and cankerous abscess occur in the wound, or anything similar such as clotting of blood within the bladder, with stoppage of the urine (which would be signified by the urine being accompanied by blood) pass your finger into the wound and remove the blood; for if it lies in it it will lead to sepsis and necrosis of the bladder.
Then wash out the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply whatever treatment is suitable for the case until it heals.
Also at all times during treatment his hips should be bound and kept together so that the medicaments applied to the place may not be disturbed.
Now if the calculus be small and be impacted in the opening of the urinary passage, preventing the exit of the urine, treat it with the means I am about to describe before you go on to make your incision, for often I have found this treatment suffice without incision; I have experience of this.
You take a drill of the finest steel, of this shape.
It should be triangular at the point and sharp, with a wooden handle.
Then take a thread and with it bind the penis beneath the calculus to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.
Then introduce the iron of the drill gently into the meatus until the drill reaches the stone itself, and then very very gently revolve the drill upon the stone with your hand, and try to perforate it, till you pierce it through to the other side.
Then the urine will at once be released.
Then, with your hand outside the penis, squeeze the remains of the stone, and they will crumble and be washed out by the urine and the patient will be cured.
But if this treatment is not possible for you on account of some impediment, then tie a thread beneath the stone and another above; then make an incision down upon the stone in the penis itself between the two ligatures, extract it, then undo the ligature and clean away the blood that has clotted in the wound.
The purpose of the ligature beneath the stone is lest it return to the bladder; and the purpose of the one above it is that when you loosen the ligature after removing the stone the skin may fall back into place so as to cover the wound.
On this account, when you tie the upper ligature, you will have to raise the skin so that when you have finished operating it may go back and cover the wound as we have said.
