 CHAPTER FORTY-ONE.
On opening superficial tumours of the scalp.
 Small swellings form in the scalp, which are of the various kinds of cyst, contained within membranes which form a capsule to them like the crop of a chicken.
There are many kinds of these.
There are fatty ones, there are those containing a liquid resembling black slime, there are those containing a liquid resembling porridge and gruel and the like, while others are stony hard.
It is not dangerous to open and extract any of them, so long as you do not encounter an artery in excising them.
The operation for incising them begins by exploring them with the instrument called an explorer, figured lower down, so as to get to know what sort of contents they have.
If they are the sort that contain fluid, incise them with a simple longitudinal incision, thus.
Begin your incision at the letter b, to letter g; and when the humidity is emptied dissect away the capsule containing it, whole, not leaving the least remnant.
For often it comes back if any has been left behind.
Then dip some cotton wool in Egyptian ointment if you have some; if not, in saline; and pack it in the wound and leave till next day, for that will destroy the remains of the capsule.
Then repeat the cotton wool with Egyptian ointment a second time, or a third if need be, till it is certain there is nothing of the cyst left.
Then treat the wound with ointments until healed.
If the tumour contains a fatty cyst, incise thus, a cruciform incision; then hook up the edges of the incision, dissect away every direction, and strive to extract the containing capsule.
If you should come across an artery, deal with it in the manner already described.
Carry out the same manner of incision and treatment for a stony tumour, just as I have described.
It is easier to open a hard tumour, for it has little blood and humidity; and sometimes these tumours on some people's heads have no humidity at all.
I myself cut down upon a tumour in the head of an elderly woman and I found the tumour as hard as a stone, rough and white, which it was impossible to break, and which if thrown at anyone would have injured him.
For all tumours arising in the head other than these, such as those which occur in children's heads and those at the root of the ear, make a simple incision.
You should always begin your incision from below to allow an easy downward flow for the pus.
Then treat with suitable after-treatment.
