 CHAPTER ONE.
On the cure of hydrocephalus.
 This disease occurs most commonly in infants upon delivery when the midwife grasps the child's head roughly.
It also sometimes happens from some hidden and unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease except in very small children; and death very quickly overtook all those that I have seen; therefore I have preferred not to undertake operation in these cases.
I have seen a child whose head was filled with fluid and daily growing in size, until the child could not sit upright on account of the size of his head, and the humidity increased till he died.
Now this humidity sometimes collects between the skin and the bone; sometimes it collects beneath the bone and over the membrane.
The operation is thus: when the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, an incision should be made in the middle of the head, transversely.
The length of the incision should be about two thumb-joints, so that the humidity may flow out.
This is the form of the scalpel.
If the humidity is more copious and the swelling greater, make two intersecting incisions to this pattern.
But if the humidity is beneath the bone—and the sign of that is that you will see the sutures of the skull gaping on all sides, the water manifestly yielding when you press in with your fingers—you should make three incisions in the middle of the head, in this pattern.
After incising, draw out all the humidity; then bind up the incisions with pads and bandages; and over the bandages foment with wine and oil till the fifth day.
Then loose the bandage and dress the wound with lint and ointments.
And do not forget to bandage the head lightly; and feed the patient with a dry diet with little fluid, until the part is strengthened and healed.
Another pattern of incision is to see where the tumefaction and collection of fluid is apparent.
For sometimes it is greater in the posterior or anterior part of the head, or to the right or to the left.
Therefore make your incision where the tumefaction and dropsy are apparent; incise that place in whatever way you can.
Be careful not to cut an artery lest you cause haemorrhage and the patient die of that haemorrhage at the same time that the humidity is evacuated.
