 CHAPTER FOUR.
On the treatment of a chronic flux of bitter tears into the eyes.
 When lachrymation is chronic and arises from the external vessels on the cranium, nor does treatment by any kind of medical remedy have any effect, and you see the patient's features flushed, and he feels a creeping in his forehead like that of an ant, and his eyes are wasted and moist, and the roots of the lashes itch, and the eyelids are burned by the bitterness of the tears, the Ancients were compelled to treat it by this operation which they called 'treatment by the sword'.
You bid the patient shave the hair of his forehead; then you make three parallel incisions across his forehead a little apart; and let the length of each incision be two fingers' breadths; the first incision continuing the line of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second at a little distance from the temporal muscle; and the third incision on the other side of the forehead.
Beware of cutting the two arteries which are at the sides, and keep your hand away from the mandibular joint; and let there be a distance between each incision as of three fingers joined.
Have ready by you some pieces of sponge or a number of linen towels to wipe away the blood.
Then introduce the double-edged scalpel shaped thus through the incision near the temple to the middle incision, and with it pare off all the skin between the two incisions with the periosteum; then do the same from the middle incision to the third one; then draw out this scalpel and introduce into the first incision another instrument which is known as 'the knife-shaped': sharp on one side, smooth and blunt on the other, thus.
The sharp edge of it should be turned upward to the subcutaneous tissue and the smooth edge toward the bone; then push it on to reach the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels passing from the head down toward the eyes, without letting the incision come through the outer skin.
Then do the same from the middle incision to the third.
After a moderate quantity of blood has flowed, express the bits of blood-clot from the place and pack into each incision a pad of teased-out cotton wool.
Over all put a pad soaked in wine and oil, or vinegar and oil, lest an effusion occur.
On the third day loosen the bandage and rinse with plenty of tepid water and afterwards dress with balm of basilicon with rose-ointment and other treatments for wounds, until healed.
