 CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX.
On pustules occurring on the prepuce and on the glans; and blackness and necrosis and adhesions between glans and prepuce.
 These pustules very frequently occur in the urinary meatus and are excrescences of foul tissue.
Some are malignant and some are not.
The nonmalignant you should seize with a fine hook and pare away until they are altogether gone; then apply to the place cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; then afterwards dress with Palm ointment until healed.
But when the pustules are malignant, of a dirty colour, for these you should employ the cautery after cutting and scraping them.
If the pustules be on the prepuce of an uncircumcized unbeliever and there are some inside the prepuce and some outside, those that are inside should be removed first; and when they are healed over, then treat those outside.
For if you deal with both at the same time you are in danger of going through the prepuce.
Sometimes there occurs a blackness and necrosis in the testicles and prepuce; then you should scrape away all the black part which looks ready to go necrotic or has already necrosed.
Then afterwards smear on the place honey with pounded and sifted pomegranate peel and bitter vetch.
Then carry on with the usual treatment until healed.
If haemorrhage set in, cauterize with a lunate cautery figured thus.
For the cautery serves a twofold purpose, namely against haemorrhage and for a putrefying wound.
If at any time the penis mortifies and goes entirely, you should pass into the urethra a leaden cannula so that the patient can make water.
As to the adhesion of the glans to the prepuce (which occurs in him who has his prepuce intact, being under no obligation to be circumcized; sometimes too adhesion may occur by reason of a wound or an abscess) you should scrape it with a flat-nosed scalpel until the adhesion is divided and the glans penis is freed all round from the prepuce.
But if the complete separation of the two be difficult then you should dissect away a little of the glans and of the prepuce; for the prepuce is thin, and consequently it is often pierced quickly.
Separate then between the glans and the prepuce with a piece of fine linen dipped in cold water to prevent further adhesions.
Then let it be dressed with some styptic wine till it heals over.
