 CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
On incision of ungula and excrescence of the canthus.
 Ungula occurs in two forms: either the nervous, which resembles a fine hard membrane; or the non-nervous, like a white congealed humidity; which, when the iron touches it or you try to pick it up with a hook, is cut through and the hook has no hold on it.
Both kinds grow from the greater angle of the eye, whence they spread little by little until they cover the pupil and block both the vision and the movements of the eye.
This is the method of incision: the patient places his head in your lap and opens his eyes; then you raise the lid with your hand; then with a gently curved hook pick up the ungula and pull it upward; then take a needle threaded with a horse hair or an ox hair, and a strong thread; slightly curve the end of the needle; then thrust it into the middle of the ungula, piercing it with the needle; and tie the ungula with the thread and pull upwards; and, with the hair, peel the side of the ungula adjoining the pupil, and divide it with a sawing motion right through.
Then what is left in the root of the angle cut out with a fine scalpel, or with small scissors; and leave the natural caruncle in the canthus lest, in cutting it away, a chronic flux of tears occur.
The ungula may be drawn out with the hook alone or with the thread as we have said, and scraped away with the smoothtipped scalpel of this form.
But beware lest the scalpel touch the corneal covering and cause a fissure in it and the pupil protrude.
Then after the incision put into the eye a little powdered salt or an eye-lotion of verdigris, and leave it till the following day; then treat as may be necessary till it heals.
If the ungula is non-nervous in origin and you cannot transfix it with a needle nor get a hook to hold fast in it, this sort is often successfully treated by medical means.
So treat as described in the section.
But if you prefer to cut it, open the patient's eye, and take a fine smooth scalpel, rather blunt, like this and with this gently scrape away the ungula from above; and if you see that it is crumbling away and breaking down under the scraping, then immediately instil into the eye some eye-lotion of verdigris, or the red eye-lotion, or a little powdered salt, and bind the eye up till next day.
Then repeat the operation on it till you have removed it all, unless an abscess forms in the eye, in which case cease the operation and treat the abscess till cured.
Then repeat the treatment with the same scraping till healed.
As for a protuberance of flesh in the angle, if it causes great hurt pick it up with a hook and cut part of it away, with not too big an incision lest there be a flux of tears.
Then into the canthus instil red eye-lotion or lotion of verdigris till healed.
