 CHAPTER FIFTY-SEVEN.
On the circumcision of boys; and the correction of their erroneous treatment.
 Circumcision is nothing but a solution of continuity like other wounds: but as it is a result of our deliberate action, and as it is done particularly to boys, we should plan in this case the very best operation, and the easiest way that leads to safety.
Now the Ancients made no mention of circumcision in any of their books, since it was not practised in their religion; but it is something we have acquired by experience.
I have myself seen the common run of practitioners and barbers carry it out with razor and with scissors; they use a spindle-whorl, a ligature of thread, and incision by means of the finger-nail.
I have personally tried all these ways and have not found a better than circumcision with scissors and a thread ligature.
For circumcision carried out with the razor is often eluded by the skin; for the skin of the prepuce is of two layers; and often the outer skin is incised and the inner is left intact, so that a second incision is needed, and renewed pain; while when the circumcision is done with a spindle-whorl you are in danger of cutting the tip of the penis, since the tip often goes into the aperture of the whorl.
As for circumcision by the finger-nail, the nail will often slip off the skin and your operation be spoilt; or the boy's foreskin may be naturally short, for many are born thus, not needing circumcision.
I have seen this myself.
Experience has taught me the superiority of circumcision with the scissors and the thread ligature.
For scissors cut evenly, since the upper edge of the scissors is exactly the same as the lower edge; and so, as you compress your hand, thanks to the correspondence of the two blades you cut equally and simultaneously; and you make the girdle of the thread like a wall all round the skin of the tip of the penis: thus no error can occur.
 The manner of operating is first to make the boy, especially if he is one who understands a little, imagine that all you are going to do is tie a ligature on the tip of the penis and leave it for another day.
Then amuse him and cheer him as much as you can, according to his intelligence; then stand him upright before you, not sitting; and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot and do not let the boy's eye chance upon that or any other instrument.
Then with your hand take hold of the tip of the penis, blow into the foreskin, and draw it back till the glans penis is exposed; then cleanse from it all unclean matter that has collected.
Then ligate the indicated place with a double ligature, and a second right round beneath; then take hold at the site of the lower ligature with thumb and forefinger, very firmly, and cut between the ligatures; then quickly push back the skin and draw out the glans penis; then let a little blood flow, for that is all the better and prevents the swelling of the tip of the penis; then wipe it with a piece of soft cloth, then sprinkle on it ashes of dried gourds (this is the best of all that I have tried) or else fine white flour, which is also good; then apply on top of the powders a piece of linen with egg-yolk cooked in rosewater, beaten up with fresh oil of roses of good quality.
Leave this on the wound until the following day; then dress it in the usual way till healed.
This is the type of scissors most suitable for circumcizing.
They should be fiat-nosed, sharp, with no bend in them, and with the pivot tempered ; and the length of the handles should be equal to that of the blades.
Now the mistake often occurring in circumcision is for the inner layer of skin, either the whole or the part, to be inverted at the cutting.
So you should at the start draw it out with your finger-nail before the place swell; then make an even incision.
And if you are unable to get a hold with your finger-nail then pick it up with a hook and make your incision.
If after three days there still remains some inflation and swelling of the part below the tip of the penis, let it be until the effusion subsides, and then gently peel it away and cut it as best you may.
Be careful of the tip of the penis; though if any of the tip is cut away that will do no harm.
And dress the wound with stimulating medicaments from among the powders that we described in the treatise on powders.
Should more of the skin be cut away than necessary and the skin is wrinkled up, that will do no great harm either.
Continue such treatment as we have mentioned, until healed.
