 CHAPTER THIRTY.
On the extraction of teeth.
 You should treat toothache with every device and be reluctant to extract; nothing can replace the tooth when it is extracted, for it is a noble substance—until there is no means of avoiding extraction.
When the patient is determined to have it out, act with deliberation till you are sure which is the painful tooth; for often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks the pain is in a tooth that is sound, so he has that one extracted; but the pain does not abate until the diseased tooth is removed.
We have frequently seen this happen in the practice of the barber-surgeons.
When you are quite sure which is actually the painful tooth you should cut away all round the tooth with a scalpel having a certain measure of strength, until the gum is separated all round.
Then, with your fingers, or with a pair of fine forceps, first move the tooth slowly and gently till you stir it; then get a good grip on it with a pair of large forceps, holding the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move.
Then draw the tooth straight out so as not to splinter it.
And if it will not come out, then take one of these following instruments and gradually introduce it beneath the tooth all round; then try to move it as you did before.
If the tooth has a hole in it or is decayed, you should plug the hole with a rag, forcing it in with the tip of a fine probe so that it will not break when you grip it with the forceps.
You must completely scarify all round the gum.
Take the utmost care not to splinter the tooth lest a piece should remain behind and arouse the patient's ills afresh, causing greater pain than before.
Take care not to do those things that the ignorant barber-surgeons do in their rashness and haste in dental extraction, neglecting to employ the methods we describe.
For they often bring great troubles upon people, the least of which is to break the tooth off short, leaving the whole or part of the root behind; or to remove the tooth together with a piece of the jaw bone, as I have often seen.
Then after the extraction let the patient rinse with wine or vinegar and salt.
If there occur haemorrhage from the place—a common occurrence—then pound up a little vitriol and stuff the place with it.
If the vitriol does not avail, cauterize.
The shape of the fine forceps with which you first move the tooth should be with long jaws and a short handle, thick, lest they bend when you take hold of the tooth.
And this is the shape of the large forceps.
As you see, they have thick handles so that when you apply pressure with them they do not give or bend; and short jaws.
They should be of Indian iron or of steel, strongly made, the jaws tempered and having teeth fitting into each other so that a sure and firm grip may be obtained.
Sometimes the jaws are made like a file, also to give a strong grip.
