 CHAPTER THIRTY-six.
On the treatment of swelling of the tonsils and other swellings in the throat.
 Sometimes there occur in the throat buboes called 'tonsils', which resemble the buboes occurring externally.
When you have employed the remedies described in their own place, without effect, examine, and if the tumour be hard, dark coloured, and devoid of sensation, do not touch it with an instrument.
If it be of a red colour, with a thick root, do not touch this with an instrument either, for fear of a haemorrhage; but let it be till it come to a head; then you may perforate it or let it burst of its own accord.
But if it be pale coloured, round, with a slender pedicle, this is the kind that should be cut.
The operation for this is first to see, before operating, whether his inflamed tumour has already completely subsided or to some extent diminished.
Then make the patient sit down in the full light of the sun with his head in your lap; open his mouth; and have an assistant before you to press back the tongue with an instrument like this.
It should be made of bronze or silver, and slender like a knife.
And when the tongue is depressed with its help, the tumour will be made manifest to you and your direct vision will fall upon it.
Then take a hook and fix it in one tonsil and pull it forward as far as it will go; but be careful to not pull away with it any of the mucosa.
Then cut it with an instrument of this form; it is like scissors except that its extremities are curved, the beak of each meeting the other, and very sharp.
It should be made of Indian iron or Damascene steel.
If you have not this kind of instrument, cut it with a scalpel of this form, on the one side sharp, on the other quite blunt.
And when one tonsil has been cut away, remove the other in exactly the same manner.
Then after the excision let the patient gargle with cold water or vinegar and water.
But if there occur a haemorrhage let him gargle with water in which have been boiled pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves or similar styptics till the haemorrhage is stanched; then treat till healed.
Sometimes there grow in the fauces tumours other than the tonsils; remove them just as described for tonsils.
I once treated a woman for a tumour that had grown in her throat and was rather dark in colour and had little sensation.
It had almost blocked the throat and the woman had only a narrow opening to breathe through, and was quite prevented from eating or drinking, so that she was at death's door, if she had so remained for a day or two.
From the tumour there arose two offshoots, which had eventually emerged through the nostrils.
So I made the utmost haste and, fixing a hook in one of them, drew it forward, and out came a sizeable piece.
Then I cut it off where I had hold of it near the nostril.
Then I did the same with the one projecting from the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and depressed the tongue; then fastened the hook in the tumour itself and cut off a part of it, with only a little haemorrhage; and the woman's pharynx was freed and immediately she had a drink of water, then took some food.
And from time to time, for long after, I continued to cut away this tumour.
But fresh growth continually replaced what was excised till we both grew weary of it.
Then I went about it astutely and cauterized the tumour high up in the throat, and it stopped growing.
Then the woman left the district and I do not know what God has done with her since I had charge of her.
