 CHAPTER SEVENTY-SEVEN.
On the forms of instruments necessary for extracting the foetus.
 Speculum for opening the entrance of the womb.
This is the type of instrument with which books are pressed.
It has two screws at either end of two pieces of wood; but this instrument should be more slender than a book press, and should be made of ebony or boxwood.
The width of each piece of wood should be about two fingers' breadth and the thickness about one, and the length a span and a half; and in the middle of both pieces of wood, firmly attached, should be two projections made of the same kind of wood, each half a span long or a little more, and two fingers wide or a little more.
It is these two projections that are to be introduced into the vagina so that it is thereby opened when you turn the screws.
 Another instrument, for the same purpose, but smaller and lighter.
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, but at the end it has two projections as you can see; and the length of each is about a span and the breadth two fingers.
When you wish to open the womb with this, make the woman sit on a couch with her legs hanging down, parted; then introduce the two projections pressed together into the orifice of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument lower down between her thighs; then open your hand in the same way as you would do with forceps, to the extent to which you wish to open the womb, so as to allow the midwife to do what she desires.
Another type of screw speculum mentioned by the Ancients.
Figure of the thruster for thrusting the foetus.
 Figure of the cephalotribe for crushing the foetal head.
It resembles scissors with toothed jaws, as you see.
Sometimes it is made long like forceps, as you see in this illustration, with teeth like the teeth of a saw; and you may either cut or crush with it.
Figure of another thruster.
Figure of a hook.
This is a hook which should be rather thick so as not to break when extracting the foetus.
Figure of a doubleheaded hook.
Figure of two broad scalpels for cutting up the foetus.
Figure of a two-ended scalpel.
 The more types of these instruments the practitioner has ready by him, the more rapidly he operates, and the greater his reputation among men.
So do not neglect to have ready by you a single one of these instruments, for you will certainly need it.
