 CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the elbow.
 The elbow is with difficulty dislocated and with difficulty put back.
Now dislocation may be in all directions, and particularly forward and backward.
Whatever way it is dislocated it will not be concealed from you, because it is both visible and palpable, and whenever you compare the dislocated elbow with the sound one it is quite openly and plainly manifested; for the elbow joint is hollow and the patient cannot flex the forearm back or touch his shoulder with it.
You must hasten and reduce the dislocation as rapidly as possible before an abscess occur.
For if an abscess occur the reduction of it is difficult and maybe it will never be healed; especially when it is a posterior dislocation, for this is the worst and most painful of all the kinds of dislocation, and often it is fatal.
Now when it is one of those that can be reduced, the way to reduce it is for an assistant to perform a two-handed extension of the patient's hand, the patient's forearm being opened out, while the doctor's hands are above and below the elbow joint and he thrusts the joint with both thumbs together or with the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
If it be an anterior dislocation, it may go back if the hand is bent sharply back until it strikes its own shoulder with the root of the palm.
 If the dislocation does not respond to reduction, apply very strong and powerful extension.
For this, let two assistants pull on the arm while two other assistants hold the patient against the extension.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions after the limb has been wrapped in a long folded cloth or a broad wrapper.
When the doctor begins manipulating the joint he should anoint his hands with oil so as to assist, by its lubrication, the movement of the joint; then he should thrust the joint powerfully until it goes back.
After its reduction he should apply to it a plaster having some styptic and absorbent qualities, with egg-white; and put on a firm bandage and suspend the patient's arm from his neck and leave it for some days.
Then undo it; and if the joint remains fixed in its place, then untie the bandaging and leave it.
If you see that the joint is not thoroughly firm, replace the plaster and bandaging and leave it for a few more days until it is firm; then untie it.
If, after the reduction and unbandaging of the joint, it becomes stiff and is difficult to move, soften it in the bath and apply gentle friction and massage until it is softened, or apply to the joint the tail of a fat-tailed sheep; bind it on and leave it on for a day and a night; then remove it and send him to the bath, and when he sweats apply moderate friction to the joint; then replace the tail and again and again, alternating with the bath, until the joint softens.
If you prefer, apply to it, and bandage on, fresh cow-dung lightened with butter.
Do this a number of times and it will soften and return it to its original state.
