 CHAPTER EIGHTY-FIVE.
On wounds of the abdomen, and protrusion of the intestine; and on suturing them.
The tear that occurs in the abdomen may be great or small or it may be middle-sized.
From a large tear one or more segments of gut may protrude.
The reduction of this and the suture of the wound is an exceedingly hard and difficult matter.
Small openings may also be difficult in another way, for they are bound to be harder to reduce, and if you do not hurry to return the gut to its place at once it will swell up and enlarge, thus rendering reduction difficult.
So the best tear is the medium-sized, for in this case the reduction of the intestine will not be as difficult as in the two other cases.
 Then you should know that suturing the abdomen may be carried out in four ways.
Two of them are general; suitable both for suture of the abdomen and for other wounds of the body.
The other two sutures are special; they may be used for other wounds, but are more suitable for abdominal wounds.
I shall describe each one to you separately, with comments and explanation.
I begin then by saying that when the wound is small, and a piece of intestine protrudes from it, rendering the reduction of it difficult, the difficulty will be due to one of two causes: either on account of the smallness of the fissure, as we said; or because the gut has become inflated on account of the coldness of the air.
If the latter case obtains, the gut must be warmed by fomenting with a sponge or piece of cloth bathed with warm water or water in which have been boiled rushes and cyperus and hyacinth, bathing the gut until the inflation is gone down.
Wine that is somewhat astringent may do; in bringing down the swelling it is better than plain water.
When you see that the swelling has come down, bathe the gut with water in which have been infused althea and mallows; for with this the reduction of the bowel becomes easy, using the lightest effort.
But if after this treatment the reduction is still difficult, open up the wound a little with the instrument for opening up haemorrhoids.
The first method, if possible, is better than incision, but one may be compelled to incise when other means have failed.
This is the form of the instrument.
The curved side should be sharpened, but not the other; the slender extremity should not be as slender as a scalpel, but rather blunt; it is an instrument like a small polo-stick, as you see.
When the wound is opened up a little with the instrument and the bowel is reduced, it is important to return it to its natural shape and proper position, if you can, for that is better.
When the wound is large and in the lower abdomen the patient should lie on his back and have his legs higher than his head; but if it be in the upper abdomen his head and chest should be placed higher than his lower parts.
And in the same way if the opening be on one side of the abdomen you should always make it your object to put the wounded side higher than the other.
So must you proceed in large or middling wounds.
But in small wounds put the patient in a position convenient to yourself.
Then have an assistant under your direction to enclose within his hands the whole of the wound and bring the edges together, and then uncover it bit by bit for the one who is putting in the stitches.
 Now this is the description of one general suture, namely: one or more needles are taken, depending on the size of the wound; then, leaving about the width of the little finger from the end of the opening, pass an unthreaded needle from within through both edges of the skin together with both edges of the peritoneum which lies beneath the skin, piercing from one side to the other; thus you will have brought together both skin edges and both peritoneal edges, making four layers.
Then wind a double thread several times round the needle, and tighten up from both sides so as to bring the two edges of the wound perfectly together.
Then again leave about a finger's breadth and put in another needle and fasten it with thread as you did in the first instance; and go on doing this with as many needles as you need until you have finished mending the whole wound.
The needles should be of medium fineness; for the very fine needles soon cut into the flesh; while thick needles, on the other hand, are difficult to pass through the skin; so they should be medium between fineness and thickness.
You should not introduce the needle too near the edge of the skin lest the tissues be soon cut through and the wound gape before it has joined.
Nor should there be too great an interval between the stitches, lest the wound be prevented from scarring up.
Then cut off the ends of the needles lest they hurt the patient during sleep; and make for him pads of linen scraps to cover the needle ends on both sides; and let them be until you know the wound is healed up.
This method of suture with needles is most suitable in small wounds, for one or two needles or thereabouts will probably be enough for such.
Now the second kind of general suture is to bring together all four edges, the two skin edges and the two peritoneal edges, at one and the same time, with a needle furnished with a twisted thread of medium thickness.
Then when the needle has pierced these four edges bring it back precisely to where you began, so that the thread may lie knitted over the wound to make a stitch in the manner of sewing up the bags in which goods are packed.
The distance between stitches should be a little finger's breadth.
Everybody is familiar with this stitch.
With this stitch I once sewed up a wound that a man got in the belly.
He had been wounded with a knife; and the opening of the wound was more than a span long; and by that time there protruded some two spans' length of his mid-gut.
The opening was in the middle of his belly; and I reduced it after the bowel had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound healed in about a fortnight, and I treated him until he was better; and he lived for many years after this, carrying on as usual.
The verdict of the doctors was that he could not be healed.
The remarkable thing is that I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where there was no sort of medicine; so twice a day I applied teased-out cotton wool to the wound, and carefully washed it with honey-water until he was healed.
 I shall now describe one of the two kinds of special suture according to the text of Galen.
You begin at the skin, running the needle from without inwards.
When you pass it through the skin and the muscle that runs the length of the belly, leave the edge of the peritoneum on that side where the needle was introduced; and pierce the other edge of the peritoneum from within outwards through the other edge of the abdominal wall.
When you have done this, pierce the same edge of the abdominal wall from the outside inwards, leaving the edge of the peritoneum which is on that side, and pierce the other side from within outwards.
As you pierce, make the needle pass through the peritoneum to the edge of the abdominal wall that is adjacent to that part until it pierces right through the whole.
Then begin again on that same side and sew it together with the peritoneal edge on the opposite side and bring the needle out through the skin nearby.
Then reintroduce into the same skin area and sew the opposite peritoneal edge with that abdominal skin edge and bring the needle out through the adjacent skin.
Do this once again and repeat until you have sewn up the whole wound after this fashion.
In short, this way of suturing is to sew with the stitch used by furriers in sewing skins; thus you stitch the peritoneum once one way with the skin edge and leave it once the other way, until you have done.
 Now the manner of the second type of special stitch which Galen mentioned is this (these are his own words): that you suture it in the same way as many practitioners.
That is, they suture each part to the part that corresponds naturally to it; so they join one peritoneal margin to the other and one skin margin to the other, in the manner I shall describe.
You should put the needle from without inwards, in that edge of the abdominal wall that is nearest to you, and make it pass inward through that alone, leaving out the peritoneal edges; then turn the needle round and run it from without inwards through both peritoneal edges.
Then turn it round again and make it pierce, from within outwards, the other edge of the abdominal wall, on the opposite side.
This type of suture is better than the easy general suture that has been mentioned.
These are Galen's very words.
Some have said that the suture of the abdomen may be performed with two needles, thus: you thread one thread into both and begin by introducing the needle into that part near you and carrying it through to the other side.
Then you insert the other needle on the far side and bring it through to the near side, after the manner of the shoemaker's stitch.
 You must understand that when the fissure is in the middle of the abdomen the sewing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
But the medical treatment of the wound comes under just the same heading as that of other wounds.
When you find a wound with its blood quite fresh, before the atmosphere has altered it, and you have reduced the intestine and have sewn it up and closed it firmly, apply to it powder to encourage fresh growth.
But if the air has altered it, then apply to it some of the available ointments until it suppurates and the threads come away and the peritoneum and abdominal wall heal; then dress it as you would any other wound, until it is better.
If you have no medicaments to hand, apply cotton wool as soon as suppuration begins, and change it twice daily, as I have taught you, until it heals.
You will need no other treatment in the majority of cases when the wounds are simple.
 But if you fear that the important organs may share the hurt of the wound, then you should dip some soft wool in moderately warm olive-oil or oil of roses and bind it round the various sites between the groin and the axillae.
If pain or gangrene be felt in the bowels—and that frequently happens—then clyster him with tepid astringent black wine, particularly if the gangrene has already set in in the bowel and has become a wound penetrating to the abdominal cavity.
You should know that if the injured bowel be the large intestine it will heal the more easily, while if it be the small its healing is more difficult.
But the part of the bowel called the jejunum is not likely to recover from an injury to it at all; and that is due to the number and size of arteries in it and to the thinness of its structure and to its nearly approaching a nerve in its character.
If what protrudes from the wound be omentum, and you find it freshly protruding, then reduce it as you do intestine.
But if some time has lapsed and it has turned green or black, you should ligate it above the site where it has gone black lest there be a haemorrhage; for the omentum contains veins and arteries.
Then cut off what is below the ligature and leave the ends of the thread hanging out from the lower part of the wound, so that it will be easy for you to draw upon it and extract it as the omentum falls away and the wound suppurates.
 A note on the wound occurring in the intestine.
When a break occurs in the intestine and it is a small one, it is possible, in some men, that it may mend.
For I myself saw a man who had been wounded by a spear-thrust in the abdomen.
The wound was to the right of the stomach, and, being chronic, became a fistula whence issued faeces and flatus.
I set about treating him, though I had no hope of his recovery, and I continued to attend him, and eventually he recovered and the place healed over.
And when I saw that the place had healed over I was afraid for the patient lest some harm should occur in the abdominal cavity; but absolutely no harm arose from it, and he remained perfectly well and healthy, eating and drinking and engaging in coitus and going to the bath and carrying out the duties of his office.
Some men of experience have said that when a wound occurs in the intestine and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner, namely: ants with large heads are taken; then the edges of the wound are brought together and one of these ants is applied by its open jaws to the two edges of the wound, and when it seizes it and closes its jaws then the head is cut off, and it will stick and will not loosen.
Then another ant is applied near the first; and you proceed after this manner with a number of ants according to the size of the wound.
Then reduce the intestine and sew up the wound; for the heads will remain sticking to the intestine until it is healed up; and no harm will come to the patient.
 The intestine may also be sewn up with the fine suture which is extracted from an animal's gut and sticks to it after being threaded in a needle.
The method is that the end is taken of this suture made of gut, well scraped; and to this end is fixed a fine linen thread, twisted, and then that thread is passed through the needle affixed to the suture of animal's gut, with which the intestine is sewn and then replaced in the abdominal cavity.
These kinds of suture, with the ants and with the gut, are by way of a remote hope.
But if the opening be great and wide, and especially if it be in one of the small intestines, there is no technique to deal with it, nor any cure.
