 CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
On setting a fracture of the leg.
 The leg consists of two bones.
One of them is thick and is called 'leg bone' (tibia).
The other is slender and is called 'fire-stick' (fibula).
Both of these are liable to the same kinds of fracture as occur in the two bones of the forearm, therefore the repair of them will be like that of the arm, and the operation is one and the same.
If both bones are broken together, the leg will turn in all directions.
If the fibula is broken there will be a forward deformity of the leg.
If the tibia be broken, and that low down, it will be obvious to you.
Employ levelling and extension and binding on of splints similar to that (sc.
of the arm).
But it will be necessary, if the fracture of the leg be a serious one with much fragmentation, for the extension to be gentler and lighter; and you must employ the utmost gentleness in setting it.
The operation on the leg involves one more process than that on the arm, namely, that when you have set the splints and have finished the task, you should take two strips of pine wood such as are used for roofing upstairs rooms, being put in the gaps of the planking, or they may be palm stalks; pick out such as are somewhat thick and not too thin; they should be as long as the leg from the knee down.
Then wrap each of them in a cloth folded into two longitudinally, and put one on each side of the leg; they should reach from the knee to the extremity of the foot.
Then tie the two strips in three places, namely at the two ends and in the middle; this binding prevents the leg from bending to right or left and it will be held in a good straight position.
Sometimes a 'gutter-splint' is used, made of wood according to the length of the leg; the leg is placed in this and it keeps the leg motionless.
This is particularly necessary in a compound fracture.
Then carefully examine the leg every day and use the utmost care to guard against effusion or swelling or other like things; and when anything of this sort happens employ the means to meet the case until it heals.
The bone of the leg mends in thirty days or so.
