 CHAPTER SEVENTY-FIVE.
On the training of midwives in how to treat living foetuses when not brought forth in the natural manner.
 To begin with, the midwife must know the manner of normal labour.
Among the signs of it are these.
If you see the woman strain her abdomen and desire to breathe more air, and the pangs come easily to her and she hastens to deliver the child, by this you may know that the labour will follow a natural course and that the presentation will be vertex with the afterbirth, either together with the child or hanging by the umbilical cord.
And when you observe these signs it will be necessary to put pressure upon the abdomen to bring forth the foetus quickly.
For when it presents the vertex the afterbirth comes down with it and she is thoroughly cleansed of those superfluities.
But a delivery that is contrary to this is unnatural and wrong.
Sometimes the infant is delivered by its feet; or by its hands before either head or feet; or a single hand or foot; or the head comes out together with a foot.
Or it comes out all twisted, often with the nape of the neck first; or in other wrong positions.
So the midwife must have wisdom and dexterity and be skilled in all these cases and beware of failures and mistakes.
I shall explain the technique in these modes of delivery so that she may be instructed and may be acquainted with them all.
 When the foetus comes out by the vertex in the normal manner and yet the delivery is with great difficulty for the woman and you see that her strength is getting exhausted, then make her sit on a seat and have her held firmly, and foment her womb in a decoction of fenugreek and in bland oils.
Then the midwife should take between two fingers a little scalpel and make an incision in the foetal membrane or open it with the finger nail, to allow the contained waters to flow out; and put pressure upon the woman's abdomen until the foetus comes down.
But if it will not come down then the woman should have an enema of mucilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame.
Then bid her bear down after the enema, and with ptarmica stimulate her to sneeze; and close her mouth and nose for a while and the foetus will quickly come out.
If the hands of the foetus present, you should slowly and gently push them back; and if they will not go back then place the woman upon a seat, have her feet raised and meanwhile shake the seat; but the woman should be held lest the shaking cause her to fall off.
But if the two hands will not go back and the foetus is dead cut them off and draw out the remains.
Or tie tapes to the hands and pull on them evenly and it will come out.
Foot presentation: when the foetus presents feet first you should raise them both; then you should very gently turn the foetus so as to straighten it.
Then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.
When they come down as far as the hips, bid her bear down, make her sneeze with ptarmica, and it will come out.
But if it will not come out with these means we have described, you should return the foetus gently until you have placed it in the natural position; then it will come out easily.
But if it defies all that we have described, take mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and oil of sesame and dissolved gum, and pound them all well together in the mortar and anoint the woman's pudenda and lower abdomen; then make her sit down in warm water reaching to the costal margin.
And when you see the lower parts are softened, make a suppository of myrrh and let her introduce it; and when she has had the suppository in for a while make her sneeze, stopping her nose and mouth; and press gently upon the abdomen; then will the foetus immediately emerge.
 Presentation of the foetus by knees and hands : when it comes out after this manner you should seek to introduce the hands slowly; then let the woman lie back on her shoulders with her feet hanging down, reclining on a couch with her hands clasped together; then very gently put pressure upon the abdomen; then take away the pillows from under her feet until her lower parts are vertical ; and if the foetus does not come out then, take both her feet and shake them violently ; then press upon her costal margin until the foetus ascends ; then let the midwife insert her hand and put the foetus in the right position, very gently, and bid the woman bear down, until the infant is born.
 Presentation by the side with one hand hanging down: attempt to manœuvre the hand back again; but if you cannot reduce it then make the woman stand up and walk.
But if she cannot walk then have her lie on a couch, and agitate her feet violently.
Then employ the ointment which I described among the mucilages.
If parturition begins, make her sit upon a seat and attempt the reduction of the hand and version of the foetus to the natural position, and make the woman sneeze and bear down until the child is born.
Presentation on the back, with hands outstretched and face towards the mother's back: the midwife should take the infant's hand and then turn him very slowly, and gently rectify his position.
Then when he is in the correct position apply to the maternal passage the oil and mucilage prescribed.
Then bid the woman move gently and when she has done so make her sit down upon a seat and bid her lean over to her right side; then bid her bear down, and with ptarmica make her sneeze ; then the foetus will come forth.
The foetus presenting laterally, doubled up : when it presents at the os in this manner together with the membrane, open the membrane with your finger nail and let out the waters.
And if it adhere over the infant's face and neck, cut it away from the umbilicus lest he be strangled and die.
Then push the foetus back till it is in the proper position, and bid the woman bear down a few times until the foetus comes forth.
The birth of twin or multiple foetuses: you should know that it is a common occurrence for twins to be born alive, and sometimes three or four infants, but this is a rarity; while five after this manner is altogether unnatural and they never live.
Although they may be more than one, they are enveloped in a single membrane but separated one from the other by a dividing membrane joined to the umbilicus of each one.
And when they are born they may come in the natural easy manner of a single foetus; or by any abnormal presentation such as we have described.
And if one of them be born with difficulty, presenting in some unnatural manner as described, the treatment is also as described.
Let the midwife be delicate and do whatever she does gently and calmly, adopting in each case whatever technique it demands that will conduce to a safe result.
 A note on the foetuses that may be formed in the womb and abort.
Sometimes in the womb there may form one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more than ten.
And I can vouch that one woman had an abortion of seven foetuses and another woman of fifteen, all of them formed.
This is by the decree of the Almighty, the Wise.
And all this should be part of the midwife's knowledge, for one day she may meet such a case and she must deal with it in the proper way.
