 CHAPTER FORTY-THREE.
On incising the larynx for a tumour arising in the throat.
 The Ancients mentioned this laryngeal incision, but I have not seen anyone in our parts who has done it.
Now here is the gist of what they say.
Incision should be avoided in those suffering from quinsy, for they will not benefit from it, since all the passages and the lung will be diseased.
But in those with an abscess in the mouth, throat, or tonsils, and when there is no disease in the windpipe itself, you must employ laryngotomy to avoid the mischief of suffocation.
Now when we wish to undertake this we should incise the larynx under the third or fourth ring of the windpipe with a small incision transversely between two rings, so that the incision may be through the membrane, not the cartilage.
This spot is suitable for incision, for it is deficient in flesh, and there are no blood-vessels near.
If the practitioner be nervous, he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook, then cut down through the skin till he reach the windpipe, and avoid blood-vessels if he see any.
Then let him incise the membrane which we have spoken of.
You can be certain of having opened the trachea by the emission of phlegm when it is pierced, and by the loss of voice.
Then leave the wound open for some while.
When the danger of suffocation is passed, bring the two lips of the wound together by the skin, which alone must be sutured, without the cartilage.
Then use medicaments stimulating granulation till healed.
 The author of this book says, the interpretation of this account that we have given is this: when they see that one of the tumours that they mention has obstructed the patient's throat and he is approaching death and is anxious himself to be incised, they resort to laryngotomy so that the patient may breathe somewhat through the wound and his life be saved.
They bid leaving the wound open till the worst of the disease abates; its height will last about three days; then they bid sew up the wound and dress till healed.
My own experience was this: a slave-girl seized a knife and buried it in her throat and cut part of the trachea; and I was called to attend her.
I found her bellowing like a sacrifice that has had its throat cut.
So I laid the wound bare and found that only a little haemorrhage had come from it; and I assured myself that neither the jugular vein nor an artery had been cut, but air passed out through the wound.
So I hurriedly sutured the wound and dressed it until healed.
And no ill befell the maid except for a hoarseness in the voice, but nothing more; and after some days she was restored to the best of health.
Hence we may say that laryngotomy is not dangerous.
