 CHAPTER SIXTY-TWO.
On opening a watery hernia.
 A watery hernia is a collection of fluid in the white membrane lying beneath the skin surrounding the testicle, which is called the scrotum.
Sometimes it has a capsule of its own which nature has formed alongside the testis so that one would think it another testicle; it may also form between the skin of the scrotum and the white membrane which we mentioned; however, this occurs very rarely.
This hernia arises from a weakness occurring in the testicles and this matter drains into it; sometimes it happens from a blow upon the testicles.
The fluid is of different colours, sometimes yellowish, sometimes blood-red, sometimes like lees, black, and sometimes the fluid is watery-pale; this actually is the commonest.
Now these are the signs whereby we know where the fluid is collecting: if it be in the tunica albugínea, as we have said, the tumour will be round and slightly elongated like the shape of an egg.
The testis is not apparent since the fluid hems it in all round.
But if the fluid be contained in a capsule of its own the tumour will be round, to one side of the testicle; therefore one imagines that it is another testicle.
If the fluid be situated between the skin of the scrotum and the tunica albugínea it will be obvious to the touch.
If you wish to know the colour of the fluid, take a sample from the tumour by means of the four-sided exploring needle which has been figured previously; and by what comes out in the track of the explorer you may know the colour of the contained fluid.
 When we begin operative treatment the patient should be told to be venesected, if possible, if you see that he is of a plethoric bodily habit.
Then let him lie on his back upon something a little raised, and have a heap of material placed beneath him.
Then sit down on his left side, and bid an assistant sit on his right side and draw out his penis toward one side or other of the scrotum and toward the hypogastrium.
Then take a broad scalpel and make a longitudinal incision in the scrotum, from the middle almost to the pubes.
The incision should be straight, on a parallel with the median raphe of the scrotum, down to the tunica albuginea, and dissect away from it carefully lest you cut it.
You should dissect chiefly on the side where the testicle is most adherent, and take your dissection as far as possible.
Then open up the membrane containing the fluid with a wide perforation and draw off all the fluid.
Then with hooks separate the two edges of the incision and draw the membrane upwards but do not touch the skin overlying the testes; then cut away the membrane in whatever way is possible, either as a whole or piecemeal, particularly the side piece; for unless you use the utmost diligence in cutting it away you cannot be certain that the fluid will not come back.
If the testicle should protrude from its covering of skin while you are operating, return it when you have finished cutting the membrane; then bring together the two edges of your incision with a suture.
Then dress with the usual dressings for wounds until healed.
 If you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, you will have to tie off the vessels which are in the suspensor, for fear of haemorrhage.
Then cut the testicle from the suspensor and remove it and dress as we said above.
If the accumulation of fluid be on both sides you may know it to be a double hydrocele; so make another incision on the other side as you did for the first.
If it is convenient for you to make one operation of it, do so.
Then wipe away the blood and apply to the incisions wool that has been soaked in olive-oil or oil of roses and on that again more wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the testicles and over the hypogastrium; and over that again folded pieces of linen forming pads and bind them down with a bandage having six heads.
Two pieces of cloth should be taken and sewn together and packed in between with carded wool to this pattern.
The ends by means of which it is attached should be made of cotton or soft wool and should be drawn tight at the waist of the breeches.
One of the ends you take over the seat toward the back: the second end you take toward the pubes, the two ends round the thighs below, and the remaining two ends over the groin, and the whole is bound up tight with the belt of the breeches.
This rupture may also be treated by cautery instead of surgery.
This will mean taking a knife-edged cautery and cutting with it the skin of the testicles; it should be hot, as we told you before, and used until the white membrane covering the hydrocele be exposed.
Then take another cautery of this type, which resembles the Greek letter tau; and with it perforate that membrane.
It should be hot so as to draw out all the humidity.
Then stretch the membrane with hooks, dissect away the capsule with the cautery and cut it away as best you are able until you have completely removed it.
But be careful that the heat do not touch the testicle.
You should know that this operation is safer, further removed from the danger of haemorrhage, and better, than operation by incision.
If, while operating either with the knife or the cautery, you are hindered by an inflammatory swelling or haemorrhage or anything else, you should deal with all of them by suitable treatment in accordance with what has been said before.
 If the patient be timid and will not suffer this operation on account of its unpleasantness, then treat by perforation as I shall now describe.
When by the signs we have mentioned you are certain that the hernia is watery, you should seat the patient on a high chair and pierce the tumour in its lower part with a broad scalpel.
The perforation should run in the long axis of the body, and it should be an ample opening to let all the fluid run out.
Then put cotton on the place and bind it on and leave it so as to soak up the rest of the fluid; then dress the wound until it heals.
But if the fluid fail to flow out when the opening is made, which would be due to the tunica albuginea's obtruding into the opening and preventing the outlet of the fluid, you should then introduce into the wound a goose-quill or an instrument such as is used for ascites, already described; or else the opening should be widened a little.
But you should know that after six months or so the fluid may come back and collect again; when it does so, perforate him in exactly the same manner; so will the patient prolong his life.
