 CHAPTER TWO.
On a fracture occurring in the head.
The kinds of fracture occurring in the head are many, of various forms and differing causes.
Some fractures are due to a sword-stroke which may cut right through the bone and reach the membrane beneath the bone, like an adze-cut in wood, for which reason this kind of cut is called 'ascial'.
Or the sword may cut through part of the bone, only slicing through the surface and not reaching the depth; this kind is called an absolute avulsion.
The wounds in these two fractures can be either big or small.
There are also some fractures accompanied by smashing or crushing; such as by a blow from a stone or by falling on a stone, and the like.
A fracture of this kind will be either penetrating, reaching the membrane beneath the bone; or superficial; the wound in these two fractures may be either big or small.
Then there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone, as fine as a hair, a thin crack; therefore this kind of fracture is called 'capillary'.
There is a fracture due to a fall or a blow from a stone and the like, making a dent in the surface of the bone and a hollow at the site as occurs in a bronze bowl when a blow falls on it and a portion of it is pushed in.
This mostly occurs in heads whose bones are soft, as those of children.
Any of these kinds of fracture may also have splinters, jagged or otherwise; we shall deal with the treatment of all these in their place.
All these kinds of fracture are diagnosed by laying them bare and investigating them with probes and removing all the lacerated tissues over them.
The 'capillary' kind is diagnosed by laying bare the bone, wiping it clean, and rubbing ink on it, when the fracture will appear black.
As to the treatment of the fracture: begin by paying attention to the patient's symptoms.
If you observe any symptom clearly indicating something dangerous, such as bilious vomit, convulsion, mental derangement, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, protrusion and inflammation of the eyes, and similar symptoms, then leave the patient alone and do not treat him; for in the majority of cases these symptoms undoubtedly indicate the approach of death.
But if you find symptoms that do not alarm you and you see hope of recovery for him, then begin treatment as follows.
If he be brought to you immediately after his injury and it be the season of winter, you should try to remove the bone, at all events before the fourteenth day.
If it be summer you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the covering membrane beneath the bone and over the brain be infected, and before the above-mentioned symptoms occur.
If the fracture has already reached the cerebral membrane with fragmentation of the bone and depression, then you must cut out the splintered and broken part as I shall now describe to you.
Shave the head of the injured patient and lay the bone bare in any way you can, following the course of the injury and in the manner least grievous to the injured man.
If, when you lay the bone bare, you encounter a haemorrhage or abscess, meet the case with suitable remedies; that is, pack the place with dressings soaked in wine and oil of roses, and cleanse the wound until the swelling subsides and you are safe from haemorrhage; then begin the trepanning and removal of the bone.
This may be done in one of two ways.
One way is to cut the bone with a fine-bladed chisel, this being the figure of it.
Then after this one employ another chisel, a little broader.
It is figured here.
Then use yet another chisel still broader than the second.
You should have by you a number of different chisels, some broader than others and some shorter than others; their tips should be exquisitely sharp; and they should be made of Indian iron or best steel.
Let the strokes upon the chisel be gentle lest the head be shocked or injured.
If the bone be strong and hard you should, before you use the chisel, make perforations round about it with drills called 'non-sinking' drills.
Their name of non-sinking drills is due to their not piercing the cranial bone through to what is beneath, because the drill has a circular margin beneath its sharp head like a small collar or wheel, that prevents it from sinking in and going beyond the thickness of the bone.
 You must obtain a large number of these drills each of which will suit a certain thickness of bone; so that for each skull you have a drill whose pointed extremity is of a length to suit the thickness of that skull.
Here are figured three kinds of drill, large, medium, and small.
As to the manner of perforation round the fractured bone, you apply the drill to the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced, then you transfer the drill to another place, making the distance between the perforations about the thickness of a probe.
Then with the chisels cut out the bone between the perforations, using the utmost delicacy, as we have said.
Then take out the bone, either with your hand or with some other instrument you have ready for the purpose, such as forceps or fine tongs.
You will have to observe the utmost caution that neither drill nor chisel touch any part of the membrane.
When you have cut the bone circularly, free from the membrane if adherent to it, and have removed it, then you will have to scrape away and smooth out all the roughness in the remaining bone with another instrument, resembling a chisel, except that it must be finer and slenderer than any of them.
If there are any little bits or spicules of bone left, pick them out with whatever instrument you can, gently; and then treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we shall describe.
The other way of operating is altogether easy and free from danger; Galen mentioned it and greatly praised it; these are his words: You should begin by laying bare that part of the bone where the fracture is severest and most obvious; when you have done so, place under it the tip of this lenticular chisel figured here.
The lenticular part of it should be smooth and not for cutting, the sharp part of it being on both sides longitudinally, as you see; so that the lenticular part is resting upon the meninges while the cutting surface is on the bone.
Then with a small hammer strike the tool on one side until you gently cut through the bone in a circle, in the confident knowledge that nothing untoward can happen to the membrane even though the operator be the most ignorant and cowardly of men; yes, even if he be sleepy.
If any membrane stick to any part of the bone, strip it off with the lenticular tip of the chisel and free it gently from it, for it will come away without harm or danger.
If it be a fracture of the bone not reaching to the meninges, only the surface of the bone being separated, and there remain some roughness and fine splinters, you should smooth down the roughness and remove the splinters with fine scrapers, of which you should have a number, of varying sizes so that you can use the one best fitted and most suitable, in the light of what is suggested by your operative method and the broken bone itself and its shape.
When you smooth the bone you must first use the broadest of the scrapers and then a finer one, and so on until you come to use the finest and slenderest of all.
 As to the rest, the little capillary fractures and fine fissures, you will have to apply to each of them that treatment that will bring about a perfect repair.
This is obvious to anyone who has the least practice in this art and is acquainted with what we have written in explanation of the big fractures.
If the meninges are left bare when you remove the bone, you should take a linen dressing measured to the wound, soak it in oil of roses, and apply it to the opening of the wound; then take another dressing, folded in two or three, soak it in wine and oil of roses and apply it over the first with the utmost gentleness so as not to press upon the meninges; then employ a broad bandage on top, but tighten it only enough to keep the wound covered.
Leave it with this dressing on for a day or two until you are sure there is no abscess; then loosen it and apply desiccant remedies such as lily roots, vetch-flour, powdered frankincense, birthwort, and the like.
The method is that you make a powder of these drugs and sprinkle it, dry as it is, upon the wound; in short, in these cases use drugs whose nature is cleansing and not irritating.
In this be most diligent, that the wound, while you are treating it, be clean; nor let there be any dirty vestiges of ointment in it or any filth; and let no pus collect in it; for when pus collects on the meninges it corrupts them and renders them necrotic, which causes great harm to the patient.
Sometimes the surface meninges go black when the bone is removed, especially when the treatment of them is neglected; so observe, and if the patient exhibit any of the symptoms that we have mentioned you may know that he is undoubtedly doomed.
But if the blackness be due to some medicament applied to it, which has the power to produce blackness of that kind, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of oil of roses, beat them well up together, spread on a cloth and apply it to the membrane; then treat as necessary until cured.
