 CHAPTER NINETY-ONE.
On the extraction of the Medina vein.
 This kind of vein occurs in the leg in hot countries such as the Hejaz and the lands of the Arabs and in hot arid infertile countries.
It also often occurs in other parts of the body beside the legs.
The origin of it is a corruption taking place beneath the skin in the same way that round-worms and worms and gourd-worms arise in the inward parts of the body; also the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.
The sign of the beginning of the occurrence of this vein is a violent inflammation in the leg; then the place swells up and blisters; then the vein begins to extrude at the blistered place as if it were a plant-stem or an animal.
When its extremity has appeared it should be wound and tied round a little piece of lead, from one to two drachms in weight, which you leave hanging from the leg.
Then as fast as any of it issues from the leg, wrap it in the lead, and if there be plenty of it cut off part and tie the rest of it; do not cut it right down until it has all come out; for if you cut it right down it will contract and draw back into the flesh and produce at the place an abscess and suppuration and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it should be treated gently, and drawn out slowly until the very extremity of it emerges and not the least bit of it remains in the body.
In some cases the vein comes out five or ten spans in length; indeed I have heard of one twenty spans long that came out from a certain man.
If it breaks during your treatment of it, then pass a probe into the hole and open it up with a long incision longitudinally, until all the contained matter is evacuated; and try to make the place suppurate with medicines for a few days, then treat as an abscess.
Sometimes also this vein is found branching, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself; and in this case there are many openings and a branch comes out of each.
The treatment is as mentioned above in the section.
