 CHAPTER EIGHT.
On the repair of ribs when they are fractured.
 You should know that fracture of the ribs occurs only at the thick parts bordering on the vertebrae, whereas the anterior extremities are only contused, because they are cartilaginous; this is easily diagnosed on examination with the fingers.
They should be set by levelling out the fracture with the fingers in any manner you can so that the form is as it should be; then apply the plaster and bind the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
If it be a depressed fracture of the ribs, then the patient will have a vehement pain and a piercing sensation like that of pleurisy, since the bone is piercing the pleura; in addition he will have difficulty in breathing and will cough, and vomit much blood; the treatment of this is difficult.
In this the Ancients practised many devices.
Some said that the patient should have food of such a kind as to generate wind and inflation to blow out and stretch the belly and so push out the fracture.
We, however, reject this, since it will excite an effusion if one has not already arisen; and if one has arisen it will increase and confirm it.
Some of them said a cupping-vessel should be applied to the place and strong suction be made; this seems more reasonable except that there is a risk of the vessel's drawing superfluities to the place on account of his weak state.
Some of them said that the place should be covered with wool soaked in warm oil and that a pad should be placed in the intercostal space to fill it up so as to make the bandaging level when you wind it round.
Then treat the patient with diet and medicines as for pleurisy.
If the patient is in such a bad way that he cannot bear it, the bone painfully piercing the pleura, and we are afraid for him, then we shall have to cut down upon the place and lay bare the broken rib; then we place under it the instrument to protect the membrane, which has been described, and gently cut out the bone and remove it.
Then the edges of the wound should be joined, with a suture if large, and dressed with ointments until healed.
If meanwhile there arise an abscess, quickly soak pads in oil of roses and apply them to the place and treat the patient with internal remedies against abscess too.
Let him lie upon the side which is easier for him to sleep on, until it heals.
