 CHAPTER FORTY-ONE.
On cauterization for sciatica.
 When pain occurs in the hip joint and is due to cold and humidities, and the patient has been treated by those means mentioned in the section, and the treatment is ineffectual, and the pain becomes chronic, the patient should be purged of the heavy humours with foetid pills or pills of tamarind or the like; then cauterize him.
The means of cauterization in this case is twofold: either with caustic chemicals or with fire.
The actual cautery will serve for several methods.
One of them is to make three cauterizations over the femoral joint itself in a triangular manner ; and let them be of a fair depth; and the space between them a finger's breadth.
The cautery should be an olivary one.
Sometimes there will also be one cauterization in the middle over the actual head of the femur, making four cauterizations in all.
The burning may be done with the circular cautery which has been mentioned under cauterization of a dislocated hip; a single cauterization so that the circle embrace the whole joint.
Burn through the whole thickness of the skin.
This is the form of cauterization for sciatica when the pain is localized in the hip joint and does not extend to the femur and the leg.
But if it extends to the femur and the leg, cauterize him over the thigh with two burns at the place where the patient indicates the pain to be; and one burn four fingers above the great tendon of the heel, a little to the outer side.
The cautery should be edged, and the depth of the burn only to the thickness of the skin.
But if the patient points out that the pain reaches to the toes, then cauterize where he has indicated to you, with a punctate cautery, three or four or more perforations if he needs it.
If he indicates that the pain is under the knee towards the shank, give him one burn there with the edged cautery.
Be careful in all your cauterizing not to carry the cautery so far as to burn a nerve or a large artery; for thence arises grave harm, or crippling, to the patient.
I myself have seen more than one person cauterizing over the tendon of Achilles, the cauterization being excessive, and the leg was affected with a defluxion of humours which eventually reached the foot and the whole was riddled; after that came diarrhoea, and, after that, death.
If there is pain in two places, cauterize both in this way.
 Certain learned doctors have mentioned a cauterization applicable to the hip in this manner: make a bowl of iron with a diameter of half a span; the thickness of the edge of its mouth should be that of a date-stone or a little less.
Another bowl is introduced into this, and a third into that; and there is a distance between the bowls of a thumb-joint.
The bowls are open on both sides; and the depth of them should be a thumb-joint or two.
Make an iron handle for them firmly fitted to the bowls.
Here is the figure.
Then heat this cautery in the fire until it is hot and sends out sparks; and so let it be applied to the hip, the patient lying on his sound side; and thus three circular cauterizations will be produced at a time.
Afterwards let it be for three days; then smear with butter and leave the wound open for a while; then treat with ointment till it heals.
The author of this book says that we very rarely employ this method of cauterization on account of the ugliness and dread appearance of it, and because we find few patients who will endure it.
Nevertheless, it is one of the best cauteries for him who can endure it and is correctly treated by it.
 Cauterization with caustics is thus: make two bowls like the ring into which a door-hinge descends, either of bronze or iron.
The height of their sides should be two thumb-joints or thereabouts, and they should be separated about a finger's breadth; they should be open above and below, and joined one to another thus.
Then place them over the capsule of the hip joint, the patient lying upon his sound side, and press down hard; then pour caustic fluid between the two rings—it should have been heated slightly—and keep it there for the space of one hour by the sand-clock.
The patient must endure the sting and heat of it (for he will find it stings like fire) till the causticity diminishes.
Then remove your hand with the instrument and wash away the caustic from the whole capsule with pure water.
Let be for three days and apply butter to it till the eschar comes away; and let the pus flow from it for a few days, for that will be more conducive to healing.
Then treat with ointment till it heals.
If the pain extends to the hip joint or the leg, make a form in some material that will hold the fluid for that, just as you did for the capsule of the femur.
Now this is the description of the caustic; I have already put it in my treatise on the improvement of drugs: take of the salt of potash and quicklime, equal parts, and beat them both up well and put them into a new earthen pot, in the bottom of which you have made a small hole of a size to take a probe.
Place under that pot another one, glazed.
Pour enough water on the quicklime and potash to cover them to a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well together with your hand; and leave the pot until the caustic fluid has passed down into the bottom of the glazed pot.
Then collect all that fluid and pour it upon a fresh lot of lime and potash.
Thus will the water be very caustic indeed.
This is used for many medical procedures and for the cauterization of all members, as it has the very same action as fire itself.
There are other drugs too with which the capsule of the femur is cauterized, such as Thapsia and Mel Anacardinum and inunction of lime with soap.
Galen, quoting one of the men of old, mentions a treatment for pain in the thigh and sciatica and he makes much of it, asserting that no other treatment was necessary, and that it would heal on one application, so much so that the patient would be carried into the bath and would go out completely cured.
The method is as follows: take fresh green water-cress or new dry water-cress if fresh is not to be had; beat it up well with some fat and apply it to the hip where it hurts, or to the leg or thigh, and bind up.
Then let be for three hours or until the patient feels a diminishing of the caustic; and then let him be taken to the bath.
When his body is bedewed with sweat, get him into the pool; then the pain will vanish and he will be cured.
If he is not cured repeat the plaster in ten days' time and then he will be healed.
But you must know that no one should have cauterization with these drugs except after evacuation of the bowel.
Dioscorides has said that cauterization with goats' dung is beneficial for sciatica.
The cauterization is carried out in this manner: take wool soaked in old oil and put it into the cleft which is between the thumb and the forearm but nearer to the forearm.
Then take the dried dung of a goat and expose it to fire until it glows like a coal.
Place it on the piece of wool, and leave till it cools, then replace it with another, and so on until the sensation has reached the hip joint by way of the forearm, and the pain stops.
This kind of cautery is called 'the dung cautery'.
