 CHAPTER FIFTY-NINE.
On the manner of irrigating the bladder with a syringe, and the forms of the instruments that serve for that.
 When there occurs an ulcer in the bladder, or there is a clot of blood or a deposit of pus in it, and you wish to instil into it lotions and medicaments, this is done with the help of an instrument called a syringe.
It is made of silver or ivory, hollow, with a long fine tube, fine as a probe; entirely hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes in it: two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The hollow part containing the plunger is exactly of a size to be closed by it, so that any liquid is drawn up with it when you pull it up; and when you press it down it is driven in a jet, as is done by the projector whereby naphtha is thrown in naval battles.
So when you wish to inject fluid into the bladder, dip the end of the syringe into the fluid and draw up the piston, for the fluid will be drawn up into the cavity of the syringe.
Then introduce the end into the urethra as we described for catheterization; then expel the fluid by means of the piston; the fluid will immediately flow into the bladder and the patient will have a sense of its entry.
This is the illustration of a fine clyster also for irrigation of the bladder.
It is made of silver or white copper.
The upper part of it is like a small funnel and beneath it is a groove where falls the thread of the ligature.
Then take a camel's bladder and fill it with whatever fluid you wish to wash the bladder out with, and tie it to the syringe with a strong ligature of double thread between the two ridges.
Warm the fluid a little over the fire; then introduce the end of the siphon into the end of the urinary meatus.
Then apply strong pressure to the bladder containing the fluid until the patient can feel the fluid has entered his own bladder.
But if you have not a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and cut out a circle; then make holes in the edge all round the circle; then pass a strong ligature through these holes all round and draw the circle in, as a bag is closed with a draw-string, first putting into it whatever fluid, oil, or water, you desire.
Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as with the camel's bladder, squeezing until the fluid reaches the bladder of the patient.
