 CHAPTER FORTY-FIVE.
On incision for various kinds of cyst.
 There are various kinds of cyst.
We have already mentioned all their varieties in the proper place.
But we need here to set forth the difference between a cyst and an abscess, for it is complicated.
The abscess will be accompanied by heat and fever and fearsome pain, until the boiling-up of the superfluous matter settles down and the suppurating process is completed: then will the fever and intensity subside.
But with a cyst there is neither heat nor fever nor pains, and a membranous capsule encloses it, its own particular covering.
The cyst is flesh-coloured, and it begins like a pea and becomes like a melon, more or less; and is of two kinds: either fatty or containing humidity; and the colours of the humidities are several, as we mentioned in the appropriate section.
 When you come to treat the cyst, you should first sound it and examine it with the instrument called the explorer, which is figured in the next chapter.
The way to examine all tumours and cysts is to take this instrument and press it in at the spot where the tumour is softest, and revolve it gently with your fingers till you know you have pierced the skin; then press it in proportionately to the size of the tumour.
Then remove the explorer and see what comes out after it.
If a humidity should flow, whatever the colour, make a simple incision, as I said for the other tumours.
But if no humidity come out along the track of the explorer you know at once that it is fatty.
Therefore make a cruciform incision upon it in this shape, as I have told you, and attach hooks and dissect away the skin gently from all sides.
Be careful with the capsule; if you can, get it out whole, together with the cyst.
But if the capsule is torn in the course of the operation, and you cannot get it out whole, which frequently happens, remove it bit by bit until there is none of it left.
For if a part of it is left behind, either great or small, the cyst will generally return.
If it defeats you and some little piece of it remain, pack the wound, when you have done all you can, with some caustic powder and bandage it and put on it something to ease the inflamed tumour, and treat in the usual way until healed.
If the tumour be large, sew the edges of the incision together and treat with stimulants.
If you should come across a blood-vessel, pulsating or not, and there be haemorrhage, hasten to pack it with pounded vitriol; and leave bandaged for two or three days until the wound becomes purulent and the boiling-up of the blood is allayed; then resume cutting open the rest of the cyst.
