 CHAPTER EIGHTY-THREE.
On the kinds of instrument for administering enemata in diseases of the rectum, and in diarrhoea and colic.
 A clyster may be made of silver or of Chinese alloy or of cast or hammered bronze.
Large and small varieties of this instrument are made, to suit those on whom they are to be used; those for the treatment of children will be small.
Patients with stricture of the anus, or pain, will have very slender clysters.
Figure of a large clyster.
The upper end of the funnel to which the membrane is bound should be broad like this; it should have a rim where the membrane may be bound down, as you see.
The lower extremity, which is introduced into the anus, should be closed and smooth, and on one side of it should be two holes, and on the other, one; the width of the holes should be about that of a probe or a little wider.
The membrane to hold the medicament is made out of an animal's bladder or of parchment, made up in the form of a small bag, a span in diameter.
It should be pierced with a number of holes in a circle a finger's breadth apart; and into these holes pass a strong thread of yarn, twisted of ten or so threads, and with this gather up the skin like a bag; and when the medicament is placed in it tie it down firmly between the two rims on the upper end of the clyster; and then give the enema.
This is the figure of the circle of skin with the holes.
Now the way to give an enema with this instrument is for the parchment or bladder to be filled with the medicament, which should be warmed so as to be tolerable for the patient; but beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
Then let the patient lie back and raise his legs; and put under them a leather mat or a blanket.
Then anoint the tip of the clyster with oil or egg-white or mucilage of fenugreek or the like; then gently pass it into the anus; then let an assistant take the membrane in both hands and together firmly squeeze it until all the contents are squirted into the bowel.
Then the clyster should be removed and the patient should raise his legs against the wall.
If the enema stimulates him to evacuate, let him hold it as long as he can; if he delay all night long, it will be all the more efficacious.
If the enema be given in a case of diarrhoea and he has to evacuate hastily, then the use of the enema should be repeated until he is cured.
If there be haemorrhoids or painful tumours in the anus, the clyster should be exceedingly slender and smooth, of the sort employed for children.
Here is a figure of a fine clyster with its skin tied on.
