 CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN.
On removal of the tumour of the uvula that is called 'uva'.
 When a flux descends to the uvula and it swells and the uvula becomes white and elongated, then it is called 'columella*.
And if it should be swollen below and rounded then it is called 'uva'.
When it has been treated as mentioned in its section, and the treatment is unavailing, and you see the inflamed tumour subsiding and the uvula becoming thin, you should amputate it.
Now those of them that are bunched up and rounded and not elongated, full of blood, or of a dark colour or black, and without sensation, these you should avoid incising; for this course is dangerous for the patient.
But when you see them as I have described, somewhat pale and elongated, get the patient to sit in the sunlight and depress his tongue with the instrument described above; then take hold of the uva with a hook and draw it down and cut it off with one of the two instruments described for excision of the tonsils.
You should not cut away more than up to the natural limit.
For if you cut more off you cause injury to the voice and speech.
Then, after excising, carry on the treatment on the lines described under removal of the tonsils, and treat till healed.
But if the patient flinch from operation, then you must contrive to cauterize it, fearlessly and boldly.
The method is to employ a caustic; you put the patient's head in your lap; then, having depressed the tongue with the instrument described above, take some of the corrosive fluid mentioned in the book on cauterization, make it up with quicklime to a medium consistency, and fill with it the hollow in this instrument, whose form is thus.
The end of it where you put the caustic should have a hollow like that of the spoon of a spoonprobe.
With the patient lying on his side, letting the mucous secretions flow from his gullet out of his mouth so that none of the corrosive may run down his gullet and cause harm, you place the instrument right on the uvula.
Then, steadying the hand that is holding the medicament, press it out on to the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see the uvula turn black and the corrosive action cease.
If you wish, you can take some cotton wool twisted on the end of a probe, and, having soaked it in the caustic, apply the probe with the wool, down through a cannula till the wool sticks on the uvula.
Do this over and over again till you have done all the cauterization you want, then let be; for it will shrink and fall off in three or four days.
If you need to repeat the treatment, do so.
After the cauterization, wipe all round the uvula with wool soaked in butter, and with that mop up all the caustic remaining round about it.
Then let him rinse his mouth out with cold water and do you treat with external embrocations, and gargles within, till he is well.
This kind of treatment is safer than incision and less to be feared.
Sometimes uva is cured by a method milder than either incision or cautery, namely by means of vapour in the following manner: take pennyroyal and artemisia absinthium and organy and rue and wormwood and chamomile and southernwood and similar herbs and put them all, or some of them, in a pot, cover them with vinegar, and boil them.
The pot should be luted with clay; and there is to be a hole in the middle of the lid to which is fitted a hollow instrument like this, made of silver or bronze, and the end in which is the protuberance should be put in the patient's mouth so that the vapour passes up the tube to the uvula, which becomes of a very dark colour.
Do this repeatedly till it sloughs away.
Be careful not to apply this treatment at the first appearance of the tumour, for often you will aggravate the tumour; but you should do it at the decline of the inflammation.
If you do not have this instrument, take a reed and fit an egg-shell on the end so that the patient's mouth is not burned; for the egg-shell will prevent the heat of the vapour from burning the mouth.
This is a really good and safe treatment.
