 CHAPTER NINETY-FOUR.
On the extraction of arrows.
 Arrows vary both as to types and as to the different parts of the body pierced by them.
They differ thus as to type: some are big and some are small; some with hollow heads and some with solid; some of them have three angles and some four; some have tongues; some have spikes.
The difference due to the part transfixed by the arrow is twofold: for there are either the chief hollow organs such as the brain, the heart, the liver, the lungs, the kidneys, intestine, bladder, and so forth—when one of these arrows transfixes an organ of this kind, and you observe the signs of death which I shall describe to you later, then you must avoid the extraction of the arrow in that case, for death will generally follow; but when you do not see these fatal signs and the arrow is not quite buried in the depths of the organ, then extract it and dress the wound.
 Now the signs when the arrow has struck the brain, and penetrated the bone and injured the meninges covering the brain, are these: there arise from that a violent headache and vertigo and giddiness and a redness in the eye, and a redness of the tongue, and convulsion and mental confusion and bilious vomit; perhaps also blood comes out of the nose or from the ears; often also the speech is affected and the voice is lost; also there comes out of the site of the wound a white fluid which resembles gruel, from which there flows something like the juice of meat.
If you observe these signs, avoid treating the patient and extraction of the arrow if it has not come out.
 The signs of an arrow in the heart are: nearness to the left breast; the patient feels it as if it were fixed in something solid, not hollow; often also there will be imparted to the arrow a pulsating movement; and black blood will issue from the wound; and after this follow coldness of the extremities and a cold sweat and unconsciousness; then you may know that death is surely on its way.
 The sign of an arrow that has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound; also the vessels that lie along the neck swell up and the patient changes colour, breathes heavily, and seeks to inhale fresh air very strongly.
But if the arrow strike the pleura then it will be close to the small ribs and he will breathe deeply with much pain and heaving of the chest, and all parts of his shoulders will be agitated.
 If the arrow hits the liver, there ensues violent pain, and blood flows from the wound, resembling the liver in its redness.
If the arrow strikes the stomach, often undigested food comes out of the wound and renders the case obvious.
If the arrow wounds the belly and is fixed in it, and from the wound there comes excrement or omentum or torn bowel, there is no hope in treatment nor in extracting the arrow.
 If the arrow has hit the urinary bladder, and urine comes out and some of the bladder protrudes and the patient has violent pain, then you may know that the wound is mortal.
But as for the other parts, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, dorsal vertebrae, collar-bone, hip, leg, and the like, in most cases they will heal if the arrow does not happen to strike an artery or nerve, and if the arrow is not poisoned.
Now I will relate to you certain cases of arrow wounds that I have seen, so that you may be guided thereby to your own methods of treatment.
For example, once an arrow struck a man at the corner of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from him on the other side beneath the lobe of his ear, and he got well, and his eye was none the worse.
Also I extracted from a Jew another arrow that had pierced the orbit beneath the lower eyelid; the arrow had sunk out of sight and I could take hold only of the tiny extremity of it which is secured to the shaft; but it was a big arrow from a compound bow, the iron tip four-sided, very smooth without barbs.
The Jew recovered, nor did any ill befall his eye.
I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
It was an Arab arrow, one of those with two barbs; and I cut down upon it between the two jugulars (for it lay deep in the throat), and worked gently at it until I extracted it; and the Christian was saved and recovered.
I also extracted another arrow from a man, that had struck him in the abdomen, and our opinion was that he would certainly die from it.
But when it had remained in him for the space of thirty days or thereabouts, and his condition was unimpaired, I cut down upon the arrow and manoeuvred it out and extracted it; and he recovered, nor did any harm befall him.
I also saw a man who had been struck in the back by an arrow and the wound had closed over it; and when the space of seven years had elapsed the arrow came out at the root of the hip.
And I saw a woman who had been struck in the abdomen by an arrow and the wound healed with the arrow remaining in it, and her condition was unimpaired; she felt no harm from it and her natural functions were not harmed.
And I saw a man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and it had healed over, and he did not feel much pain from it.
And many such have I seen.
I once drew out an arrow from one of the officers of the State, that had struck him in the middle of the nose and was inclining a little to the right, and the whole arrow was buried.
I was called to treat him three days after he had received the arrow wound; and I found the arrow wound very narrow.
I explored it with a fine probe but did not find it; but the patient felt a pricking and a pain beneath the right ear, and I hoped that the pricking was due to the arrow.
So I applied a poultice to the spot, a poultice with power to draw out and cause suppuration, desiring that the place should swell and that a sign to indicate the arrow should appear so that I could cut down upon it.
But nothing happened at that place to indicate that the arrow had come through to there; so I persevered with poulticing it for many days; yet nothing fresh manifested itself and the wound healed up meanwhile, and the patient despaired for a time of its extraction.
Then one day he felt the arrow inside his nose, and he told me of this; so for a number of days I applied a caustic medicine to the wound until it opened.
I explored it, and felt the slim end of the arrow which is fastened to the shaft; then I enlarged the opening of the wound by the use of the caustic until the tip of the arrow was plainly visible to me.
About four months passed.
Then when the wound was enlarged and I was able to introduce forceps into it I pulled on it and moved it, but it would not come out.
And I went on skilfully and gently trying for it with various instruments until one day I caught hold of it with a pair of strong forceps (their shape will be described at the end of the chapter) and drew it out; then dressed the wound.
The medical men judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed up and the patient made a complete recovery nor did he suffer any harm.
 Now I shall tell you the method of extracting certain arrows so that you may take it as a guide and an analogy for others that I have not mentioned; since all parts and details of this art cannot be comprehended in any description, nor can any book include them.
A skilful worker will form a judgement on much, from little; and on what is not present from what is before him; and he will think out a new method and a new instrument for an unaccustomed case when it occurs in the practice of this art.
So I would state that arrows come out from the parts of the body they have transfixed, in two ways: either by drawing out from the site of entry; or from the opposite side.
An arrow that comes out by the track of its entry: the arrow may be visible, standing out from a fleshy part, in which case it may be extracted by pulling.
If it does not respond to traction immediately it strikes, you must leave it for a few days until the surrounding tissues have suppurated, when the pulling and extraction of it will be made easy.
Similarly if it has stuck fast in a bone and will not come out, leave this also for a few days, repeatedly pulling on it and shifting it day by day, and then it will come out.
But if it will not come out after some days, you will have to drill away the bone from all round with a fine drill so as to make room for the arrow; then draw on it and pull it out.
 If the arrow is buried in some part of the body and is quite lost to sight, explore for it with a probe, and if you can feel it then draw it out with any suitable instrument.
But if you cannot get at it on account of the narrowness of the wound and the depth at which the arrow is, and there be no bone nor nerve nor blood-vessel, then cut round it until the wound be sufficiently wide to enable you to take hold of it and extract it.
And if it have two barbs by which it is held, free them from the adherent flesh all round, in any way you can; or, if you cannot free the tissues, try skilfully to break off the two barbs and twist them about until the arrow comes free.
 Whenever you try to extract an arrow from any part, employ a twisting motion of your hand with the forceps in all directions until you free it; and use the utmost gentleness not to break the arrow and thus make it hard to draw it out and remove it.
If you are unable to get it out at once then leave it for some days until the tissues that surround it putrefy, then return to it, for then the extraction will be easy; and if haemorrhage interfere use the remedies prescribed in the chapter dealing with that.
Exercise the utmost care not to cut a blood-vessel or nerve or tendon; and employ the greatest skill in freeing the arrow; it should be done gently and unhurriedly and with perseverance, as I have told you.
When extracting an arrow you should place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is more convenient; but if you cannot do this then let him be in whatever position is possible for you.
The arrow that is to be extracted from the opposite side either has some part protruding through or else the tip of the arrow gives rise to a palpable swelling just beneath the skin and you see it sticking out; then cut down upon it; the incision should be wide enough to admit the forceps.
Then pull on it, for the extraction of it will be easy.
If it is stuck in bone, twist it round with your hand until the arrow makes an impression in the bone and opens up a way for itself; then pull it.
If it does not come out, let it alone for some days, and repeat until it does come out.
If the arrow-shaft be in the wound, then thrust the arrow out with that.
But if the shaft has fallen out, and you wish to employ thrusting, introduce down to it the hollow instrument whose cavity will enter upon the ferrule of the arrow, then push it forward with that.
If the arrow be hollow, thrust it forward with an instrument that will enter into the cavity, for the exit of the arrow will thereby be made easy.
 If the arrow be poisoned you must, if you can, cut out in a circle all the flesh into which the poison has entered; then treat it with what is appropriate.
If the arrow that has struck be in the chest or abdomen or in the urinary bladder or in the flank and it be close enough for you to explore it with the probe and you can cut down upon it, then do so, but beware of cutting into a blood-vessel or nerve.
Then remove the arrow.
Afterwards suture the wound, if suture be necessary, and dress it until it heals.
Forceps for extracting arrows.
 The extremities resemble the bill of a bird and are engraved like a file so as not to lose grip when you close them upon an arrow or some other object.
They are made in several kinds, large, small, or medium, all according to the bigness or smallness of the arrow and the breadth or narrowness of the wound.
The hollow thruster.
The solid thruster.
The extremity is solid like a probe, to facilitate entry into, and pushing, the hollow arrow.
