 CHAPTER FOUR.
On the repair of a broken lower jaw.
 When the lower jaw is broken and it is a fracture without an open wound, examine it.
If it is merely an external fracture, not broken in two but sunken inwards, which is easily recognized, you should introduce the index of your left hand into the patient's mouth if it be a right-hand fracture; but your right index if it be a left-sided fracture; and with this, from within, push the concavity of the fracture gently outwards, with the other hand outside, regulating the correction.
 If the break in the jaw be total, into two, traction must be employed, in a straight line on both sides, until it can be set.
If any of the teeth be loosened or broken away, bind those that you hope may be preserved with a gold or silver or silken ligature; then put wax upon the fractured mandible, and upon that a doubled dressing, and upon the dressing a large and strong splint or a piece of shoe-sole leather, the length of the jaw; then over that bandage in such wise as you conveniently can and as will conduce to drawing it together so as not to loosen.
Bid the patient hold himself quiet and still, and let his food be soft broths.
If you think there is any change of form at all, hasten to loosen it on the third day; then correct the change and apply a plaster of mill-dust and egg-white, or of white flour, after you have removed the wax from it, applying soft tow over the plaster.
So long as the plaster sticks on it and the bone undergoes no change of state, let it be and do not loosen until it heals and the fracture mends, for often a fracture of this kind mends in three weeks.
If during that time an effusion occurs, employ those means of allaying this that we have often mentioned, until the swelling subsides.
If the fracture be with an open wound, examine it, and if one or more splinters have been detached from the bone, gently remove the pieces of splinter with any suitable instrument.
If the opening of the wound be narrow, open it up with a scalpel as much as you need.
When you have removed these pieces, letting no trace of them remain, suture the opening of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the ointments that are suitable for that purpose and will encourage the growth of flesh over the wound, until it heals.
