 CHAPTER SIXTEEN.
On cauterization of the eyelid when the eyelashes are turned inwards, irritating the eye.
The cauterization is of two kinds, by fire and by caustic.
Cauterization by fire will be thus: tell the patient previously, if he is one of those who pluck the lashes, to let them grow till they are long and straight; and if during growth they irritate him, bind the eyes with a fillet so as not to move till they have grown.
When they have grown and are straight, put the patient's head in your lap and mark upon the eyelid with ink the shape of a myrtle leaf, beginning near the lashes.
Then apply cotton wool soaked in egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.
Then heat a cautery of this form.
Then burn over the shape marked out, slowly, with many small strokes, till the whole surface of the skin marked out to the shape of the myrtle leaf be cauterized, specially the outer part of it.
It will show the correctness of your work if you see the eyelid contracted and the lashes risen away from the white of the eye.
Then remove your hand and let him be for three days.
Then apply cotton wool soaked in butter till the scab falls off; then treat the place with ointment till healed.
But if after an interval there be a return of the same condition of the eyelash and of drooping of the eyelid, repeat the cauterization in the same place just as you did before.
 And if it be in the lower lid cauterize this also till it falls back to its normal position and the hairs do not irritate the eye.
This is the method of burning with caustic: bid the patient let the lashes grow long and straight; then make the shape of a myrtle leaf out of paper.
Then take of common soap and of quicklime of each the weight of a drachm or thereabouts and beat them well together rapidly lest the mass get cold; then spread this on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and apply to the eyelid of one or both eyes; place also under the eye cotton wool soaked in egg-white; the patient's head being in your lap.
Place your forefinger on the caustic and press it down a little and move it about according as the patient feels the bite of the caustic; for he will feel it sting like fire.
While the stinging lasts, let the caustic remain on and move it about with your finger; and when the stinging dies down take away the caustic and wash the eye with water; then look, and if you see the eyelid raised up as by a blepharoplasty, either by fire or by incision, good.
If not, repeat the caustic application in the place that the drug has not affected and which has not gone black, until your operation is complete and the eyelid draws together.
 Then apply cotton wool with butter till the crust of the burn falls away; then treat with Palm ointment or the like till it be healed.
But in your operative procedure take the utmost care lest the least bit of caustic get into the eye.
And if, after some days, the eyelid be relaxed and some eyelash irritate the eye, then repeat the application, particularly in that part of the lid that has dropped, in the same manner as before; and treat till cured.
This is the shape of the myrtle leaf.
You should know that the human eye varies in size; so let your contracture be in proportion to this.
The right procedure is well known to him who has experience in this art.
