 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of nasal polyp.
 Sometimes there arise in the nose various superfluous fleshy growths.
One of these is a thing resembling a centipede; another, a cancerous growth, stony, hard, and pale in colour; another again is a soft growth, not pale.
Any of these growths that is soft is not malignant or cancerous.
You should make the patient sit before you, facing the sun, and dilate his nose and introduce a hook into these polyps and draw them out; then amputate what you can take hold of, with a fine scalpel sharp on one side, till you know that all the growth is gone.
And if there be anything of them left behind that you cannot cut away, then gently scrape away with any fine instrument till nothing of them remains; and if the bleeding be too much for you, or an abscess occur, then combat it by suitable means.
If it be a malignant swelling, then speedily cauterize till the bleeding stops and all the polypi are gone.
Then introduce into the nose, after the incision, vinegar and water, or wine; and if the nose be free and fluid flow into the throat from it, then know that he is cured.
But if fluid does not pass through it as it should, you may know that there is a polyp within in the upper part of the ethmoid bone where the instrument could not reach to make incision.
In this case you must take a linen thread, rather thick, and tie many knots in it with a space of a finger's breadth or less between each pair of knots; and let the patient try to get one end of the thread into his nose with a probe or anything he can, after making it into the form of a button; and let him make a full inspiration till it reaches the cartilage and comes out through the throat.
Boys at school often do this sort of thing, and it is quite easy for anyone who wishes.
Then hold together the two ends of the thread, one coming out through the mouth and the other remaining in the nose; then saw off the polyps by means of the knots in the thread ; continue doing this till you are sure that the growth has been cut off by the knotted thread.
Then take out the thread and, after wiping away the blood, put into the nose a plug dipped in Egyptian ointment.
Do this for three days or longer till the ointment has consumed the remnants of the polyp.
Then, last of all, insert a lead tube in the nose for a few days till healed.
If he need treatment with drying medicaments, use them.
This is the figure of the instrument for instillation by which oil or medicines are dropped into the nose.
 It should be made of silver or bronze like a small lamp, its oil-container open, and with its channel likewise.
If you like you may make its spout closed like a reed; and the oil-container of the instrument can be made covered over.
It has a handle at the end, as you see, to hold it when heating the oil or whatever juice or other liquid you wish.
