 CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE.
On the extraction of roots and of broken pieces of mandible.
 When, in extracting a tooth, a broken-off root remains behind, you should apply to the place cotton wool soaked in butter for one or two days to soften it; then insert the tongs or forceps with stork-bill jaws; this is the figure of the forceps.
The point should be made like a file or rasp on the inside.
If it does not respond to your attempt to extract it with these forceps, you must dig down over the root and remove all the flesh, and then insert the instrument that resembles a small crowbar; this is its figure.
It has a short rather thick extremity, and should not be tempered lest it fracture.
If the root comes out, good; if not, get assistance from the other instruments figured here.
First, with a triangular point, somewhat stout.
Another, triangular and slender.
Sometimes also we get help from this forked instrument and beside this, from other instruments and appliances mentioned above under scraping of teeth.
Sometimes also recourse may be had to this instrument resembling a large hook, figured thus.
The hooked extremity is triangular in section, of some thickness lest it break, not tempered.
You should know that dental instruments are very numerous, as are the other instruments, almost beyond reckoning.
And the experienced worker with a knowledge of his craft may devise fresh instruments according as his work on actual cases suggests them to him.
For there are certain diseases for which the Ancients did not mention any instruments, on account of the variety of them.
Now if the mandible or one of the bones of the mouth be broken or decayed, explore the site with some instrument that is suitable for it, namely one of the instruments or forceps mentioned for extraction of roots.
We also make use of forceps of this form.
They are fairly thick, to grip the bone firmly lest it slip before the bone has been got out.
Then cicatrize the place with suitable drugs.
If the bone is only slightly decayed, scrape it clean of its decay and blackness, then dress till healed.
