 CHAPTER SEVENTY-SIX.
On the extraction of the dead foetus.
 When you have dealt with a dead foetus by those methods mentioned in their chapter, and it does not come out, and you are compelled to operate, you should examine to see if the woman be in a healthy state and not having any disease on account of which you might entertain a fear for her life.
The woman should lie on her back on a couch, her head tilted back and her legs raised.
An assistant on either side should hold her down firmly or she should be bound down to the couch, lest the body be drawn out of position in extracting the foetus.
Then the opening should be anointed with moistening oils and with mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and with linseed.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages and gently introduce it into the vagina and with it locate a place in the foetus to fix hooks in.
The suitable places for that: consider, and if the foetus present the vertex then she should fix the hooks in its eyes or in the neck or in the mouth or palate or beneath the chin, or the collarbone, or about the ribs, or beneath the false ribs.
But if it present the feet let the hooks be fixed in the pubic region or middle ribs.
She should hold the hook in the right hand and put the curved part between the fingers of the left hand, and introduce the hand gently and fix a hook in one of the places before mentioned, driving it in until it comes to a hollow.
Then opposite it let her fix another or a third if need be, so as to give even traction, not pulling to one side.
Then she should pull evenly, not just in a straight line but with the foetus moved from side to side so that its exit may be eased, as is done in extracting a tooth.
From time to time the tension must be relaxed, and if any part of it be held up the midwife must oil some of her fingers and introduce them to one side to manipulate the retained part.
And if a part only of the foetus come away she should shift the hooks to other parts a little higher up, and so on, until the whole of the foetus has come out.
If the hand should come out before any other part and it is impossible to reduce it on account of the pressure, then a tape should be wound round it and she should pull on it until it is all out; then it should be cut off at either the carpal or the elbow joint.
In the same manner should the other hand be dealt with, and the feet.
If the foetal head be large and it is tightly squeezed in exit, or if there be a collection of fluid in the head, you should introduce between your fingers a spike-shaped scalpel and split the head to let the water out; or you should smash it with the instrument called cephalotribe which will be illustrated, together with figures of the other instruments, in the chapter following.
In the same manner you act if the foetus have a naturally large head: either you should cut the skull open or smash it with the cephalotribe as we said; then you should draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head comes out and the foetus is held up at the collar bones, an incision should be made to let out the humidity in the thorax, for the thorax will then shrink.
But if the thorax does not shrink and is not disposed to emerge then you should cut off pieces in any manner possible.
 If the lower belly be swollen or dropsical then you should make an opening to draw out all the fluid.
If the foetus present the feet then the extraction will be easy and it will be a simple matter to guide it to the maternal opening.
If it be stuck about the abdomen or thorax then pull on it with a cloth wound around your hand and cut an opening in the abdomen or thorax to allow the contents to flow out.
If all the limbs are removed but the head is turned backwards and is jammed, the midwife should introduce her left hand and, if the mouth of the womb is open, should put the hand into the cervix of the womb and investigate the head and, with her fingers, draw it down toward the opening and fix a hook or two in it, and extract it with these.
If it should be that the mouth of the womb is closed on account of an abscess, then one must not be rough with it but should use in this case instillations of moistening greasy substances; plasters also should be applied; and the woman should sit in a bath of softening and moistening waters.
 If the foetus present laterally and it is possible to reposition it, there should be applied the things mentioned for a living child.
But if this be not possible then it should be cut away piecemeal and extracted.
It is necessary that not a scrap of the afterbirth be left behind in the womb.
When you have completed your treatment then also apply those treatments we have mentioned for abscesses occurring in the uterus.
If haemorrhage occurs, the woman should be put into styptic fluids and the usual treatment applied.
 Now I myself once saw a woman who had become pregnant and the foetus had then died in utero; then again she conceived and the second foetus also died; and after a long while she got a swelling in the umbilicus which grew and eventually it opened and began to produce pus.
I was called in to attend her, and I treated her for a long while but the wound did not heal up.
So I applied to it certain very strongly drawing ointments, and then a bone came away from the place; then a few days passed and another bone came out; and I was mightily astonished at this, seeing that the abdomen is a place where there are no bones.
I formed the opinion that these were bones from a dead foetus.
So I investigated the place and got out many bones belonging to the head of the foetus.
I continued this procedure and got a great number of bones out of her, the woman being in the best of health; indeed she lived for quite a while like that, with a little pus being exuded from that place.
I bring forward this uncommon occurrence here since it gives knowledge and help about the sort of treatment that the doctor who practises surgery may contrive.
