 CHAPTER FORTY.
A general dissertation on the perforation and incision of tumours.
 The kinds of tumour are many and various, as will be mentioned in order in this book.
They differ in the way they are to be perforated or incised, according to two criteria.
One is the kind of tumour it is in itself and the humidities it contains.
The other is the part of the body where it occurs.
For the tumour occurring in the head is different from the tumour occurring on the posterior, and a tumour occurring in a fleshy part differs from one on the joints; each having its separate category of operation.
There are some tumours that should not be opened till after the pus in them is matured and ripe.
But others should be opened when still raw and immature, such as a tumour near the joints.
For when a tumour occurring near a joint lasts long enough to putrefy its surroundings, it often breaks down the ligaments or the tendons of the joint and causes paralysis in the limb.
Or if the tumour be near a major organ, if you delay the opening of it until it ripens you will damage that major organ.
In the same way, if it be near the anus you must open it, although unripe for opening.
The reason why you must open an abscess near the anus while still unripe, before it is brought to a head, is to prevent it from putrefying the cleft and penetrating to the inner part of the anus and becoming a fistula, and incurable.
 It is necessary too to know the time to open fully mature swellings: it is when the pain of the swelling is lessened, the fever departs, the redness and the throbbing are reduced, and the head of the abscess becomes wrinkled, with other signs.
The perforation should be made in the lower part of the swelling if possible, so that the pus may more easily drain downwards; or else in the thinnest and most swollen part of the swelling.
Your incision should be longitudinal if the swellings are in such places as hands or feet or in the site of joints, tendons, nerves, or arteries; and, in short, in all flat places where there is no curvature.
In curved places let the perforation proceed according to the place.
But when the swelling is in the fleshy parts it is best to leave the perforation, as we have said, until it is fully matured.
For if you perforate it prematurely the sanious discharge will go on longer and will be excessively foul; and often both the edges and the depths of the opening will become indurated.
Some swellings are perforated latitudinally if necessary, or having regard to the requirement of the part.
In small swellings you should use a single perforation; while in large ones you should use wide or multiple perforations according to the size of the swelling.
There are also some swellings that need a circular incision of the skin, and should be cut when they have become like a rag, and necrosed —which actually happens often in abscesses and sinuses.
And there are some that should be incised triangularly; and others with an incision of myrtle-leaf form; e.g.
a tumour on the groin.
There are others again to which should be applied circular and lunate and similar incisions.
Those that have no head, such as the smooth and flat ones, should be incised with only a simple perforation.
When a swelling is large and has collected a large quantity of pus, and you perforate it, do not be in a hurry to get it all out at once; but get some of it out and then bandage it till another day; then again remove part of the pus; and so do, again and again, gradually, till it is all got out.
This particularly applies if the patient be in a weak state, or a pregnant woman, or a baby, or a decrepit old man; for the animal spirit is very often dissolved with the sudden evacuation of the pus, and the patient dies unexpectedly.
Be very careful therefore, with this sort.
Then, after you have opened the tumour, you should cleanse the wound and consider: if the tumour has only a small opening, or it is one simple incision, employ swabs of lint or cotton wool; but if it is a large tumour with multiple incisions, introduce a swab into each incision so that they meet.
And if the tumour was such that you cut away a part of the skin, or sliced the tumour, you will need to pack it with cotton wool or plucked linen, dry; and bandage until the third day.
Then remove it and treat with the needful ointments until healed.
If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, use cold water and vinegar, soaking a lint rag in both and frequently applying it to the place.
And if the bleeding still persists then it is necessary to employ the method and the treatment and the powders that we have prescribed in many parts of this book and in their own sections.
Now if this should be in winter and the site of the tumour abound in nerves, you should have some pads soaked in hot wine and oil and then apply to the place.
But if it be in summer and the parts be fleshy, apply the pads soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, all being cold, till the third day, as we have said.
Then unbandage the tumour and wipe it and give it the treatment suitable to it, until cured.
This is the information you need about the treatment of tumours in general.
As for the particulars, I now review the way to treat each tumour, by chapters, in detail.
