 CHAPTER TWELVE.
On setting a fracture of the forearm.
 The forearm consists of two bones and is sometimes called 'the two firesticks'.
One of these bones is small and is in line with the thumb, the other is large; this is the one placed lower, under the smaller one.
The larger alone may be broken, or the smaller alone, or both broken together.
When the small upper bone (radius) is broken it is easy to set and its mending is rapid.
When the lower bone (ulna) breaks it is bad and its mending is difficult.
Worst of all is when both bones break together.
If the broken bone is the radius, the doctor when setting it must use light traction, gently, until he has it straight.
If it is the ulna that breaks, he must employ stronger traction on it.
If both bones break he must employ very strong traction.
During setting and extension the hand must be disposed on a cushion, spread out with the thumb uppermost, higher than all the fingers, and the little finger downmost, while the patient sits cross-legged upon the floor.
The cushion should be on a level with him so that he does not suffer discomfort.
Then let an attendant extend the arm from below, either by hand or by means of a band, while another attendant extends it from above similarly.
Then the doctor may straighten the bone so as to restore it to the best possible shape.
If there be any splinters in the fracture he must do his utmost to restore each splinter to its place.
If a detached splinter appears there and is piercing the skin and you have no hope of restoring it, cut down upon it and remove it in the manner we have mentioned earlier.
If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, we have devoted a separate section to this, so take the treatment of it from there.
If, when you begin to set the bone, an effusion occurs, smear a cloth with the wax made from oil of roses and white wax, of medium thickness, and bind the dressing on gently.
When the effusion subsides, remove the wax and apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust and egg-white, then apply splints; the splint that goes on the actual fracture should be a little wider and stronger than the rest.
 You should know that the number of splints for an arm is, as a rule, six, whether the fracture be of one bone or of both together.
Then bandage more tightly and strongly over the site of the fracture, and, as you wrap the bandage above and below the fracture, bind little by little more loosely according to the instruction given at the beginning of the book.
The dressings wound round the fracture should be gentle and soft, not very hard, while the cord for binding is best made of linen of medium thickness as we have prescribed.
 Some days later, examine the limb and the bandaging and if anything has happened that should be put right, such as pruritus in the limb, the limb should be bathed in warm water until the pruritus has subsided.
Let the limb be unbandaged for one night so that he may rest, then put the bandage on again.
If the bandaging has become loose and the bone has shifted or anything of that sort, correct it all diligently.
Look also to see if nourishment is being prevented from reaching the part on account of over-bandaging, in which case you will have to loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until nourishment flows to it; then bind it up.
But if none of those things that we have mentioned happens to the patient, it should not be loosened until after about twenty days.
Then the patient's hand is to be suspended from his neck, the arm being level, and he should guard carefully against agitated movements, and should sleep on his back.
You should know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty or thirty-two days, and sometimes in twenty-eight, depending on the individual's constitution and the condition of his strength.
