 CHAPTER EIGHTY-SEVEN.
On the amputation of limbs and the sawing-off of bones.
 Sometimes the extremities become gangrenous, either from an external or an internal cause.
Now when you have treated this disease by medical means, ineffectively, and you see that the disease is spreading over the limb and nothing will stop it, you must cut off that limb as far as the disease has spread, so that the patient may escape death or great affliction, greater than the loss of the limb.
 Now the sign of the victim of this state is that the limb goes black, so that you might think it were burnt with fire, or, after the blackening, it putrefies, and the putrefaction spreads to parts adjacent to that limb and begins to attack the whole body; cut it away as soon as you can.
So must you do if the disease is caused by the bite of some dangerous reptile such as the marine scorpion, viper, or venomous spider, and so on.
If the disease or bite be at the tip of the finger, cut off the finger, giving the disease no opportunity to spread to the rest of the hand.
Similarly, if it attacks the hand, cut if off at the wrist, giving the disease no opportunity to spread and attack the two bones of the forearm.
Similarly, if it attacks the forearm, cut it off at the elbow through the joint itself.
If the disease passes onward and you perceive that it has reached the region of the shoulder, by no means cut the shoulder, for that will be the death of the patient; use any treatment but that, as best you may.
In the same manner act in regard to the foot when the disease attacks a toe; namely, amputate the toe through one of the interphalangeal joints.
If the disease attacks the tarsus then amputate the whole foot; and if it ascends toward the knee, amputate the leg at the knee-joint.
If it be that the disease has passed on above the knee, there is nothing of any avail in this case but to leave it, and for the patient to resign himself to death.
Now the way to amputate or saw off a limb is to bind a ligature round below the site and another above; an assistant draws the one downward and another assistant draws the upper ligature upward; while you dissect away the tissues between the two ligatures with a broad scalpel until it is laid bare of flesh; then it should be cut or sawn.
You must place linen dressings on every side lest the saw touch a part that is sound and thus cause the patient additional pain and inflammation.
If a haemorrhage occurs while you are operating, cauterize the place as quickly as possible, or apply to it one or other of the styptic powders; then continue until finished.
Then bind up the mutilated limb with a suitable bandage and dress until healed.
Now I shall relate to you an example; what I am going to tell you is exactly what happened to a certain man's foot.
He had a blackening of the foot, with a burning like that of fire.
The disease, to begin with, was in one toe, but it went on to involve the whole foot.
When the man saw the disease spreading in the limb and felt the violent pain and burning, he hastened of his own accord to amputate it at the joint, and he got better.
After a long time had passed the very same kind of disease arose in the forefinger of his hand.
He came to me, and I attempted to suppress the superfluity with remedies that I applied to the hand, after purging his body; but the superfluity was not to be suppressed and began to spread to the second finger, and eventually the whole hand was involved in the disease.
He urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not wish to do this, hoping I should be able to overcome the superfluity, and also fearing he would die at the amputation of his hand, for the man's strength was on the decline.
 When he despaired of me he went back to his own country, and I then heard that he had gone and cut off his whole hand, and got well.
I narrate this story as help against this kind of malady when it occurs; and as guidance for you to take and act upon.
