O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science entirely, and have made the end by its explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all, so is its science perished and cut off, and nothing remains of it except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the understandings and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the implements of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of them, as much as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended. And it is necessary that he who undertakes it mounts in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of members, and the forms and connections and separations of veins, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and flesh and the number of veins, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the body is much, and with the work little; and similarly in the art of the hand.
We say to you in the introduction of this book that he who is not acquainted with the things said before, if he guards himself so that he does not fall into error and that he does not injure men; thus I have often seen more than those who engage in this science and abandon themselves to their ignorance and without experiment.
For I see a fool who mixes  i.e., an abscess of scrofula or a woman's neck, and mixes the arteries of the neck; for that reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I see one other fool who treats a stone of a man with water, and the stone was large; so he took away with it a piece of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
And I have already been called to treat it, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
And I saw another mire who took care of one duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the mire, full of ignorance, strained the fracture onto the wound as stars by strong ligature, and did not leave any room for drainage to the wound, and left it thus; and he commanded him that he should not untie it at all; and remained so that the leg was all swollen and the foot came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it so it was in peace and he felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the limb as long as the limb was all lost.
And see .i. another sore that opened .i. abscess and then inflamed by the evil of its lord.
Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it is not fitting that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, work where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which it is necessary that you guard yourselves so that the foolish fools cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in counsel and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the fearful diseases to grief health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galians says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on a bad disease unless you want to be called a foolish fool."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and medicine cauteries, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and the forms of the instruments, and the workings of the cautery, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered and the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and of the nuisance of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid and of nuisance are the longest discourse and most subtle science and secret replies; and of this speak most of the sages, and agree with it; and I suffice myself little their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to every complexion where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some advised against it and said that cauterization is great help there; and the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not good for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured from hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree to this word. For I have found it never by experiment.
And every way, let no one intervene except he who has experienced it and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of greater secrecy of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come out except to the member that is burned, and harms no other member at all.
The hot medicines come from one limb to another in moving it, and bring about diseases of great harm to the healing; and by chance may kill the patient.
The fire because of its intensity and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I lose the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they must agree on what time the cauteries should be made, and when they are ready.
And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the nuisances arising are reduced by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they cannot wait for the time when greater evil comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, like the fools do; because the disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they think, because cauteries are only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for the haste of its power, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And a most certain thing is that the disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and they are gathered together in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cauteries of iron for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand for what reason cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works. Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; and they said that the tool of cautery does not cause decay, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they claimed.
And however when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled; and if it is heated too much; so they do at the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our cautery of fire that we have made appeared in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the feet, for that the way may be easier to find.
of the olivewood cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two kinds of it made because of a disease called “soda”, and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and even for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine that loosens and liquefies the head, three or four times, according to what the virtues and the temperament and the habit of the patient can bear; and then raise the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands upon your thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm upon the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two thumbs meet, if it bleeds a little, then cauterize with the cautery called “olivare”, because of which this is the form:
And place it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and restraining your hand poke and poke while turning it; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. small; and if you do not see it, so begin the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take .i. poke of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for .iij. days; after put a compress moistened in butter; and leave on it until the scalding is gone; after cure the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And it is said by the ancients, that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they help to move it.
And they say that one must let the cautery burn so that part of the bone is burned, and then reseal what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one must leave the cautery thus longer, and to press so forcefully that one lowers the bone as wide as a ring that women put in their spindles for those that the humors come out mixed; and one must leave the wound long uncovered; after that one must cleanse and dress.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and I think that I should leave them; because the bone is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more cured and mixed for me, and of this I use thus in assembly salvation.
of the old pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and it lasts long, the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and of purging of head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Take ward if the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery a little which we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there are one of them in which one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see until the bone: the sick person feels much more great pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it is spread to the patient up to the eye, and the shoulder is purified by medicines calming, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine sharp and of fire.
The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and remove the rind and cut it 1 pock as 2 shoulders, and then make a temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the piece of alum under the skin; and when it will be placed so lie and bind it well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat fiercely the piece of alum, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on cotton dipped in butter as much as possible.
After the cure of ointment until it is healed; and if you see so do these of some burning medicines that I have written or dose treat burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery of which this is the shape:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has .i. inch of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and stir the fire slightly, until half the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of seil, and put on the place for .iij. days; then you put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at all the point, and guard yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and rule thus on the painful place a line of half a finger's length, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come close to the bone; and guard yourself from the jaw that it moves when one thrusts, and that the nerve does not feel more than the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard yourself from blood loss of the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know it, and who is not studied and experienced; and leave the work in mid-way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at the place where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suit the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. points; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then use this cautery which is called "poins," for this is its form:
After prick all around the ear of the sick one, or around the two if the pain is in both, and you are distanced a bit above the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to be cauterized; and have ten poins around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torment that must be cured by cautery are not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make cautery to resemblances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of ears and expulsions of the head and gargles, and this is not enough, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a pock of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery on the head of the ear above a pock below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a pock; and leave the cautery so long until the half of the heart is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a pock finer and it behooves the knife to be a pock larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have a fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that sharpen the brain; after which, rub the head of the patient all over, and put on the occiput the emplastery of mustard as is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if you make it as I have said.
If it is healthy in this way, good is; and if it is not, make to it .iii. cauteries of the midst between the chief down to the neck, and have of space between each cautery .i. two of gross; and cure it like the others, and if you see it joined, and the sick one suffers, make .i. cautery in the middle; and if necessity is, .ii. others upon the .ii. horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and be the cauteries which are called «olivare», as I have said before.
of the cold of the head It behooves that the head be purified with herbs and those we have said before; after this, reheat the head of the sick one, then make cautery in the midst of the head and on each horn, and .i. behind and .iii. on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the sick one suffers, and the illness is far away, make .iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most tender of the heart be burnt, and lift your hand; after this cure it until it is healthy, and be the cauteries which are called «olivare» as we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptic people should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffers from penre medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, then make gargles and mastications that modify the brain often with boiled meats; after the king makes a hole in his head in the middle, and he makes 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is bad and suffering, then make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the moisture corrupted and phlegm thick, then you cauterize with such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what is before in the division.
After you have anointed the head of the patient; afterward make one cake of linen well done, and also one circle, so put it within the head; and the sick person should sit crossed, and be held well on all sides; afterwards present the ointment, and mix some butter of ancient goat with it; and heat it gently over a fire, so that the patient may suffer it being applied; afterwards empty the circle by within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good governance, until he be healthy.
Or if you see to cauterize them, making more points all over the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts above cotton moistened in butter and fat of galingale.
of the weeping of the eyes When weeping comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient things purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more often fasting.
After that command him to raise his head, and make him cauterize the center of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the weeping descends from the eyes both together, or one if it descends in one; and cut with all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off the dripping of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, then staunch it as much as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how you will stop it; and sometimes one does cauterization or a hatereil below the two bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the eye downwards: one cautery in the center, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hatereil below the two bones; and if there is need more, one cauterizes cleverly above the eyebrow to all a small cautery.
Of the course of tears from within the eyes
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three cups of wine; after the king the chief, and make the cautery or olive-cautery middle; and make two cauteries of the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, one slightly below the cheekbones; and beware of the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the parchment of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare". This is its form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
hairs that prick the eye It sometimes happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the padding, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your sound; after rule over the paper of the eyes a figure that is as like the leaf of myrtle, and be its beginning beside the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and musk of pearlescent above the oil, then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the hairs be burned at the place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then raise your hand, and leave thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it be healed.
And if after these the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery upon that same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are stiff, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hair the eye.
The cauteries of burning medicine are that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make of parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in .1. eye only, then must one work in .1., and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in wine of egg; and let the head of the patient be in your healthy hand and place your thumb on top of the medicine, and press .1. point and the loaf every time that the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, for it burns as much as fire. When you have done this long, then remove the medicine with your thumb. And when the burning sensation has passed, then lift the eyelid, and reward yourself if you see the parchment lifted as though it had been lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if so, then it is well. If not, then put back some of the medicine on the place where the medicine did not work, until your works are equal, and your eyes placed in point; then put under cotton moistened in butter until the cured scars have been closed, after cure the place of the ointment which is called "diafenis" and another, until it is healed.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work by great care so that it does not fall from the medicine to the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make cauterization according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy side; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor lean its head; after putting moistened cotton in vinegar or in persillion juice on the eye; after heat the cautery which is like: and it is pointed to the head as like the form of a vulture's feather, altogether that it be the cautery; if you see, so it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so it be like a tent; but nonetheless, this which is pointed is good for your work.
After press the fistula when it is open, and remove the rotteness, and dry it; and if it is closed, so operate, and remove the matter from within; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part under the eye, so that your hands do not make folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and let it for three days; after that I put on cotton moistened in butter, and cure with the ointment drying until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine of corrosive acid until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what it would come in its chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to the fistula, and cut it open; after put in the incision one small cake of this is the form: and they make it to the quantity of one third of an ounce; and hold your hand on the cake firmly, and let the patient not move at all, that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened in butter or in honey: the lead will close the fistula's opening, and the healing by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the nostril, and bring the fistula back to the body from the nostril according to what is proper in its own place.
cracks in lips Many times there occur cracks in the lips that are called "poils," and even on the lips of children.
When you cure these cracks with what we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then  cauterize i. small surgical knife cautery according to this form:
And he places it gently in those crevices until it comes to the top; after caring for the place with cerote until it is healthy.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has putrefied and rotted and is enveiled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it behooves you to have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron glows at the top of it, and the last place; and do this once or ii., after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if those are not, it behoves to discover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after heat the cautery whose form will come here later in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot carefully, and hold so long that the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after raise your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the sick person with salt water, and let it remain an hour and rinse forcefully.
And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the gum softened restrained, and the moisture corrupting dried.
Of the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and the medicines do not help, then there is need for cautery in .ii. ways: cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a dish, and the end in a spoon of iron or tin; afterward take cotton and envelop it on the point of a tent, and moisten it in boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and wool are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron until the fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
The cautery of fire is such that you take a iron or tin rod, and it be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; afterward heat the cautery, from which its form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in haste of this cautery, and then pull the root; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated cautery as described after comes the form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on one side; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put cotton moistened in butter over the burn as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place of healing and tents until it is healed.
When the moistures overcome on the channels of the throat, and also when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by solutive medicines; after that, make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and burn no more than one point from the heart. After that, make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery which is called "clavile" as we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the pain When all and malady of poison are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is ancient, if he makes two cauteries on the forceps in their places; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be which are called 'clavile' according to the form that is said before.
And if you see, make cautery piercing to the whole cautery which is called 'poins' because the form is before in the malady of ears; and let the poins be up to thirty, or where it ends. After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be at three grains according to this form:
And for those are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three in one piece.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After it is supported the patient on his back and on his ribs; after lift up the heart that is inside the tittle with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, so cauterize it which has .ij. ners  for this is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces up to the ribs, and would come the figure of the cautery together four cauteries; and for this reason is made cautery with the cautery which has three ners, so that the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three ners:
And sometimes is adjusted upon this, i.e., nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After place the cautery forceps ground with sail; after make rest the patient, and let not move his limbs by long time until it be well fortified.
And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery upon the thick of the clavicle cautery or many cauteries in pricking. For the jointure is closed and is removed moisture and is healed the patient.
of cautery of pleuresin
The ancient say that one must make on the pleuresin cauteres of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the most great that thou canst find, and be dry, and as thick and as long like thy fingers; and the moisten in oil, and the press to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two little cauteres a point going down in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteres between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a point; and one cautery amidst the breast, and one above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as the two ribs of the breast behind the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and press not thy hand, but do openly as if smelling.
And they say some ancient that no man use a cautery of fire resembling one razor, and the heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and saute forth the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula it comes which cannot be cured.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mice with what we have said in the divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of cautery which are all good.
Of which one way is that you make three or four cauteries, according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be laid on his back;
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two handles, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is above the mice, or the side of the patient comes from the left, and let the elevation with which you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After he sets the two burned cauteries until the skin is pierced on the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see it, so cauterize with the total cautery to three nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this value moves more than the other cures before mentioned.
of dropsy
Cauteries are not of value for dropsy, except for the manner called "ascites." When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is fitting that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the side of the hip; and let the cauteries be well near the edge of the skin.
After leave the cautery open to fight for long time putrefaction, and do not leave at all the cure of the sick after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have before shown; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is placed above.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydropsic, and are full of white fluid, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep within them, thus shall the white fluid escape, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After do on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the point of the knife-blade; and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may stay in place; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by ways of cures; and you see the patient suffering well and of great virtue, then do one large cautery on the stomach according to what we have spoken of before about the cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel small to every one cautery clavicle small, and two cauteries on the kidneys.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each hip, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are either at the base or more than one, and they are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it doesn't benefit, if do cauteries: three on the spine of the back, this which is all outside below the almedate poc and poc in triangulating, and one cautery below the buttock two fingers;
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat doesn't cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face do one large cautery on the stomach, as it is said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the mouse to the entire cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
of the flesh which is named “thelul”
When you cut the “thelul,” if the cautery seems like a razor, then put it all ablaze on that “thelul” and cut; and let it stay there until the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood does not come out; do this once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of openings beneficial as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the “alchatim,” it will have more help.
of a poorly cured wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, there comes such a sickness that it can only be cured by cautery.
When to any comes a fistula, and it is filled and rotting with moist corruption, so the physician must take good care of a slender probe, and make sure that he knows how much the probe measures.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and does not take any semen [from a woman], then it is necessary that you make cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery chisel which we have said before; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the part outside above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as two finger widths; and make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be pointed according to the shape mentioned above.
of the kidneys When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not allow conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow; and when they arrive, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the waist, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauteries be pointed, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found the location of the viscus department, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint at one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the location around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and if it is the cautery such as the one with which the stomach was cauterized.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then make three cauteries of the olive oil large, and let the cautery be as perfect as all the others; and cure until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: therefore you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After the fire cautery is done; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together with ardent medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form:
And if you see fit, you cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the core be burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then one makes two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers' width, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be cutellar, or let it be burned with the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two finger widths of the foot or near it, then he cauterizes there where he feels the pain three fingers or four with the cautery which is called "finger."
And if this trade is necessary, if one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then he makes cautery with the cutellar or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not make more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made cautery above the ankle of the foot, and left it there so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a solution of the belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in 2 parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, because of what follows here is the manner, make 1 such iron and be at the head also as big as a small bean of finger, or a little less, and be by meshes and be from one mesh to the other of space the quantity of a knuckle of thumb; and let the meshes be towards 2 parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be 1 iron handle well made; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and let it be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once 1 cautery reont and let it for 3 days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regret, and we rarely see who uses it; and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it is needed.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by fall or percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar appearance of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are suitable for cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary, after what the patient is purged of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with charcoal, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "point"; and if you see fit, make 3 or 4 cauteries on the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight abdomen when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and on us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
When you see this and you view it being cured, cauterize it with this cautery according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be near each other. After cure the place as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, and guard that you do not administer cautery in a gilbosite which is in the spame of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When the pain of joints comes from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, if they do cautery to the whole cautery one claims "point". And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, and these happen many times, if you do cautery on each knee three cauteries or four of each part, at the whole cautery olive; and if you have need of more, if you do more, but don't hold your hand further than while the point of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, if cautery is administered that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, do points around the bone two lines; and if there remains no pain at the knees, do points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the shoulders or to the ribs, cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and careful medicines. For if you make good governance for him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the hip
When a rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the hips and it is new, if you see him cure it, that he does not move that day; and that he uses things which hold the belly, so that the bowels descend from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his armpit as long as the testicles are repaired, and pull them to your heels, and then set a cautery of this shape:
as long as it is white and that he feels the heat. Then pull the testicles to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return back; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and another on the leg which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and keep it straight and keep it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again once more until you come to the bone; and beware carefully that the testicles do not slip when you make the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and for large men also large according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the heat is removed; after that, cure with other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie down for forty days on his back until the wound is well sewn up; and it is necessary that his dressings be long, so that the testicles do not slip when he wants to go to rooms.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, administer a good brace to him and keep it for 40 other days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and beware of too much drinking and eating, and too much braising; and when he does this teaching, he is completely healed. And I will say after this the cure of the thigh in its chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make one cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be it at the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it must be cauterized with the cautery in three angles according to this form:
but first mark the place of the incision and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another one below, and hold your hand throughout the whole cautery clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine is not there, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and of its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, it's well; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, because it is customary that it must move to the limb that it is near to, therefore it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of melting
The melting are aided at times by cautery with great help, and also the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.  Since you see them cauterized, take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not leave nor remain, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole patient, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. emmi the head at nine, and the other toward the front at the end of the temples; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the back; and let it remain so that the cauteries reach to the bone, and as long as the scraps come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth; and cauterize on the mice according to what it is before.
And if the melting is spread everywhere; and it clearly progresses, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the middle of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large one on the hip and .i. other on the side, and .ij. on the .ij. shoulders; and .ij. on the arms, and .ij. on the tendons of the leg, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the heel bone, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cauterize on the bone of the thumb, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
And know that when more fire cautery is made, it does more help, and moves it benefit; and know that the sick person feels no pain in the cautery as the healthy feel it, because the body is already wholly corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in ways of irons. After cure the wound with flour of chickpeas with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cauteries be a point going into the thickness of the flesh. Then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery and on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that numbs the limb, and thus so is the swelling removed; and nonetheless let no one intervene if he is not knowledgeable of the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of  bars
When the disease that is called "albaras" is serious and the means of medicine avail nothing, then cauterize it with a cautery a small hole according to the quantity of the species of the heart, until the blanching is removed, and its color has changed; then cure it with flour of rice and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondre, each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and leave it at the place as long as it is healed.
The cure of syphilis by cautery
When the chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery which seems like .i. circle, all around the edge of the chancre.  And nonetheless, some wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have never seen it happen before; and more right thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the cautery which is called 'circule', as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling that cannot be cured
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to heal, either because of the superfluity it produces or because of the patient's blood when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and has little blood, or because of his constitution; and you see it hasten to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries, pricking; after which leave it so. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it becoming worse with all the cauterizing, then heat the cautery from this shape:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries prick the core, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning outwardly in such a way that the course of the rot is cleansed. After which cure it until it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
There is another way of illness that is called “corroding,” and it is nothing else than a gangrene of a limb, because it devours the limbs just like fire dries up the lines. If you see this illness in someone who can endure cauterization with fire, then sharpen the cautery tips very small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the illness is; after that, cauterize all around until you eradicate all the corruption, and none of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed. And then leave it for 3 days, and put on those cauterized places softened broiet with oil until the scars of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of softening generates flesh. And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if this one does not, then begin the cauterization again on what remains from the corrupted places.  And this gangrene has been cured some times with sharp medicine in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the sharp medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
From the roots that come to the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet by fire is born a disease which is called «clos» according to our understanding, and is a large thing fault which bleaches the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are as follows .i.j. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat .i. cautery head as it is a feather of vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that there are subtle edges; after that put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the root of the nail; and let it so .iij. days until it begins to fester rot; then I make a poultice of wild mallows ground with seil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment cleansing flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a chain of iron or of metal, or a feather of vulture, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say around corns; and put the chain so that it pierces all around, then I put a drop of boiling water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep down to the root; and suffer the patient for a moment the burning of the hot water an hour; then leave it so, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. Thus make one after another, as long as you uproot all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments that cleanse flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold of nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make to them .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each spine; and .i. cautery or pez, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; if leave will the trembling, and hasten will the healthy from the cold sickness.
of pus-filled pimples
Sometimes appear by fire the body bathes, or pus-filled pimples, that come from large corrupt matter. It is necessary at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, of which the point is grasped in fire, or of long aristolochia root, or at the lentil cautery. And sometimes the cauterize one at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they can not grow from them forward, but are broken up the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hastily put your finger index upon the wound of the vein, and strain it much until the blood be quieted under your finger, and that no drop issues forth more; then place on fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are all red; then take one, or greater or lesser according to the wound and its location where the artery is cut, and put the cautery upon that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding be stayed.
And if it jumps forth when you lift your finger from upon the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to make these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein shortens from the artery, one cannot well stretch it even when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch the vein; and let it be bound and strained firmly.
Who will bring a stretching of the lier tightly with straps or to put things burning upon it, or other similar things, if it does not profit so much.
And if this happens to anyone and he has neither mire nor medicine present, then he must put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but often moisten it with cold water that it be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make in front those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all the illnesses for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and shapes of the cauteries; and I have put that chapter from the head right down to the feet, and in this chapter I will go by the same way for those things that are more easily found than those you want.
And therefore, my dear child, as I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take greater care.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. Because many kinds of people come to cures. Some come so ill with their disease that they die easily because of the misfortune they find from their illness, and the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give you their senses, and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is deceitful. It does not behoove you that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain, and whom you can have taken care; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length.
Most dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised them from the chief until feet, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
the chief full of water
Know that this sickness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife strains too hard the head of the child; and some time it comes from a reason unknown.
And I have never seen this sickness outside of children, and to all that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and it seemed so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide slit; and be as long as two thumbs, as far as the moisture goes; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the edges of the head are open from each side, and the water leaps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you: then you must cut in the middle of the head three slits according to this manner:
And after the incision take out all moisture. After extract the fissures of fabrics and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound by tents and by ointments, and leave to be bound the chief bandage, and then give to the patient dry meat of piece of moistor as long as the limb is fortified and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut therefore where the abscess opens, and its filling of fluid, and widen it according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flows, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When it happens to anyone a malady which is called "catarrh" at the eyes or in the chest, and the sickness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the final cure is that cautery with this one on one covers the two arteries.
It behooves then, when you see to cover them, that the patient turn his head backward; after he rubs the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then bind the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and their places on one and the other are after the ears, and these are returned; then sign the places of its end, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts. as long as the tail comes to the bone, and this be by the broadness of the chief.
And if you see, thrust the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two thumbs across.
And when the vein is cut, it throws out blood continually upward.
And if the artery does not open at first, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then seize it and cut until the bone; and as much blood should be put out as six ounces, and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on top of the bone without a sign of pus, you cut it so that an abscess does not come, then strain the wound and tie it, and care with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, for the moistors of tears and the heats in the temples and old-fashioned foreheads and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit them, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is rarely found outside than in certain men who are too cold; and if it is found, strain the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
Then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then treat it in height as pincers, and depart well from the tissues that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it back to the tip of the awl, then cut it off from that side according to the quantity of .ij. joints. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out entirely without pain in every way.
And treat the blood of .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in .ij. lengths with a strong double silk thread so that putrefaction does not come before the suturing of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the .ij. ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cutellary cautery until the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of warm complexion.
For the cautery is help to end the moisture: for this cause it is of greater help to moisture. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and puts on top well-made tents; and when they are untied, let them be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a ligature of the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it to your hand that the wound is stained; and if you do not have these present, put over the place your cloth until the wound is frozen, and raise the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and be restrained as it should be; and what is more helpful and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching at .ij. parts, but let the trenches be well spaced to keep their heat for longer. For when the instrument is too thick, it holds less heat. And must have between the two knives one, and it must be of great width, and then when you have marked the two joints, and you place the red hot iron on them until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two joints; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not welded by this cautery at all, and this is the form of the cautery:
Tears
When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on the forehead above the face of power, and no benefit comes from medicine in doing so, and you see the face of the sick person shrink, and feel on their forehead a motion as if they were shivering; and where the eyes are swollen and wet so that the hairs of the eyebrows fall out, and the eyebrows are dried up, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
And they called it in the old days "contused cure", and is that you do to the patient who has this sickness the hairs that he have on his forehead, then he make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as two others going all through the forehead down towards the nose; and the other two as two ribs above the cheeks; and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries that are in the two ribs above the cheeks; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
from the incision which is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the two incisions to all the flesh that is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision to the other second, and then extract further this spatula.
If it is put in the first notch the instrument which is called "cultellary", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape: And place the sharp edge towards the fleshy side to the heart, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and put it so that it comes to the middle notch. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches what opens to the heart, and then on the other part make in the middle notch until the other end; and then draw out the blood evenly, and press the place for the blood taken; then put in each notch a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and asila, and guard that no abscess should come; and on the third day untie the bandage, and administer great poultice of hot water, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures as one cures wounds, until it is healed.
of the eye
When any person comes with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes red and small, and the vision weakened, and the membranes burned; and the hair falls out, and where it is felt there is a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore you know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is there, such is this.
And it is that you command the patient to rear their forehead, then make a great fissure between the eyebrow, and another wide one.  i. poc. And begin from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone; and withdraw your hand from the nerves of the temples that move in the manger; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then pour between the two lips of the fissure cotton wool old, and linen bandages; then tie above cloths moistened in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, that make cartilage harden.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster from it; and administer it on these wounds to harden the cartilage throughout.
of the stopping of ears
All that which falls into ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or something similar as iron; or seed, like lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and oil and similar things.
When something falls into the ear, like a stone or another thing that does not adhere to the ear or grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, distill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with condiment, and stop his nostrils when he sneezes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear upwards. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with fine tweezers, which is how it is done:
If it comes out with tweezers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine single-edged tool; and if it does not come out with that, make a small snare of thread and insert the head of the snare or through the opening of the ear forcefully, and stop what surrounds the snare with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the snare; then pull it out carefully, because many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take a little glutin (birdlime) and put it on any instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and place a bit of cotton around it; then press the glutin onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if it does not jump from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so that an abscess comes out and spasms; and the manner of the splitting is that you first bleed the patient of the cephalic, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat where it depends; and let the cut be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully with your mouth; and treat until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with tweezers fine and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear if water has fallen it is necessary that the patient use of externally of medicines first, and open the ear with old cotton. And be lying on that ear same where the water is. If it goes out by this, it is good. If not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger thin and light, and heat them a bit in the fire; and put them in the patient’s one who hurts of his ear, and pull up on it from her side, and press with another stone upon the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this of stone on stone until the water is all gone, and thus let it be all gone; and if you see it, then take 1 reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end hold in fire until the most soft reed is burned; then re-do another part with other reeds until the water is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body which one can feel, then administer extraction with pincers; and that is the thing more light to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if there appears any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the cauterization of which this one is the form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed in the whole chain; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, so stuff around the chain with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, because this is the form as you see:
And let it be of silver or iron, narrowed below to one small opening, and wide above for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation one instrument of iron well made for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap around the point neatly with cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and that which you wish of your medicines in the chain, and let the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be one pock heated by the fire, then as it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of stopping up the ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the stoppage of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these stoppages come sometimes from inside the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes they happen .i. pock deep inside the ear, and one can see it well.
That one which comes from inside, if one cannot see it, is of bad healing in many cases, and in this one sees that you must put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammation apparent, then the work has total these spatumile of this thing is the form.
And be sharp and trenchant in front and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the inflammation is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is wholly removed.
And if the suppuration is in the ear, take one razor subtle light and heat it a little at the fire, then put it on the body of the ear. If you feel the suppuration which the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it in the Egyptian ointment.
Do this for no day until the wound is closed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on pulverized vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it as long as it is healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures which remove the bleeding that are or treat distillations.
of the paper of the writing
This is the healing for those eyes that come from paper when they are moist and dry, so it befits you to extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the tip of a spatula from their roots; then put on top of it pounded vitriol.
And if it does not come out with this method, then cauterize them with a subtle lentil-shaped cautery, and after the incision is made, the cauterization takes effect; and many times they disappear, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return at all.
of the groin
Many times come in papers the eyes of things that seem to be brittle in its form and in its hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take war if the hail moves from one side and the other, and this is a light thing to know; make then with the broad, then the scrape of each part lightly, then take as pliers, and the cut. If you cannot cut it without perceiving a prick the paper, so do not grieve the patient; and if the rupture is large, so assemble it with a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, so do not make any force, for the ointment restores it soon and prevents cartilage.
And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper over, and being the hail to pliers, and the cut and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not grieve anything; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye of salted water, and cure the place of that which prevents cartilage until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exina is a fat that is found in the tissues of papers above, and this happens more in children than adults, and grieves much their eyes, and they come to catarrh in the mornings, and cannot see the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for that reason they lie down on their faces upwards, and sleep on top, and are their tissues below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and the appearance have covered with exina which opens in the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exina between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your knee; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exina from each part, then put it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exina is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moistor with the spatula cutting a fissure of the width, and not be more than the wound that one makes in the vein; and make the leather in depth until you come to the exina; and in more disorders comes exina from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract therefore with a whole piece of cloth between your fingers on the outside, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, until you come to all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not bleach it.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the split, so lightly pry the split until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten cloths in oil and vinegar, and put on top, and restrain with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind flax and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which is stagnant. Then treat until it is healed. And if an abscess comes to the place, hot, then treat with plasters soothing until it is healed.
of hairs of papers
When in papers hairs are born adjusted other than the natural ones, and are envelted, they harm the eyes, and bring various diseases like accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery whole fire, or by medicine ague according to that which it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and suture or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your left hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, put a needle with one thread above; and whether it is near the edge of the paper where the hair grows near these hairs, and bring one thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, at all the spatula, from the great tear up to the small; then extract one thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign above the paper a figure of an enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raising the paper which is divided at all.
And if to a certain person it is necessary that one cuts a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is mollified; then make at all the spatula above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the big tear up to the small; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the oncine in one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape it entirely; then assemble the two lips with a suture of a needle with one thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make airdred the superfluity of threads above the two eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you wish to do this; and if not, have no care about it, then leave the suture and the threads up to three days or four; then cure the wound without stitching with things drying and constricting, because the paper revives at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of them, but the stitch is muedre (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you draw on the paper a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, to three ounces apart according to the form which is here:
then cut what surpasses the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle which has one thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread along the large tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin over what you have drawn, as we have recounted, then assemble the two edges of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
and sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so you must use those that we have said of the incision; but the stitching on one and on the other is more artificial.
The cure of the slings is as follows: and that you convert the paper and the fold inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. slings by art, and .ij. subtle ligaments as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads from .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of the paper above the eye, and strain the .ij. slings from the .ij. parts that form; and let it remain like this for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrink and bear itself, until it comes out by itself.
If it takes a long time, then cut more forces, and then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sutured, and if the paper is removed, and the hairs will no longer prick; and this is the form of the .ij. slings that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
the works are such that you prick an awl, and it puts one thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another thread of silk brightly, and tie the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head on your hand; and let it be toward the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and small work; then put the needle to the whole chase in the root of the hair close-set, and make it pierce the paper smoothly until you draw it upwards from the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows above; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural cheeks, and let it rise with that one or you leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
of the rot of the eye
When this illness which is called “aleacrati” or rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens by suddenly cutting, or by incision or by cautery, and by similar things.
And the way of operating on it is that you split the wound, and separate the lips of it, and put inside a bandage of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not proper that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first; but you work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rosehip of water or high and flax seed cooked, and melted diaquilon ointment in any of the oils, and envelop a bandage, and cure it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the char that comes in the eye
This illness that is desoz which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an needle, in which there be .i. double thread, and put it in the char, and make it go through from the left tear to the right, so that the threads come into .ij. cheeks of the char; then are the char above all the needle, and the cope at .i. spatumile wide.
And if the figure of the papiere comes back according to what it is fitting, it's good; if those are not, so take .i. razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the papiere, and make .ij. fissures or cost at inside the papiere; and be the cheeks of the .ij. fissures the .ij. angles of the incision that you have copeit, and be made some angles so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no ".j. griesche"; then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is aged desoz, of those who follow the papiere, then adjust the .ij. parts severed, and the cout of a thread of wool; then care for those that we have said of softening medicines, and tents, until it is sane.
And if the ailment comes from a cut or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything with all their power how they make it return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the work and instruments in many dispositions.
of the paper
When this suture happens to humans in such a manner that the paper above is joined with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the being as pinches, until you cut what is hardened at the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too trenchant, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too sharp does not blind the eye; and be your incision, which you scrape off that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it heals all that assembly, and do no times in the eye salt water, and the lev of sweet water, and of colliers; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in yolk; and after the third day use the colliers and things so much until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: it is nervous and similar to one hard syfac, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to white moistor frozen, that when one touches it with iron and one cures it panre as pinches, so it cannot; and one and the other semblance commences towards the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle with small doubleure, and the stem upwards; then take a needle, and put one hair of horse, or of sheep, or of ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle one poc and put it into the angle, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the stem upwards, and scrape all the hair the edge of the angle that follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with all the subtle spatumile and as small forces, and leave the char natureil or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears acostumeement; and no times estent the angle at the oncine solely, and to the thread, as we have said; then the scrape one has with all the subtle spatumile souef of this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the prickle be not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a bit of crushed silk, and of the collar made of lead, and let it remain until the next day; then cure it as is fitting until it is healed.
And if the fingernail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a fingernail is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form:
And raise the fingernail subtly, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reason is rapid, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of lead and red collar and crushed silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, as long as it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a pus-filled abscess, then milk it, and cure the abscess first until it is clean, then restart the work as before, until it is clean.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the eye socket and cut off a part, not all at once, so that no more tear comes; then distill in the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
of the flesh which grows on the iris
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the iris and restrains upon the eyelids, turning them outward, and seems like a rose of balusters; and the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then open his eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable forceps to those, and hold it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go on cutting until the end, and guard yourself that you do not injure the eye during the operation; and let the incision be of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the angle and small forces for which one removes the sebum, as the form after this chapter shows.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of seal ground or distill there red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil of fire cotton with albumen of egg, so that it be assured of hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the without sock swells, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things pacifying hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as long as flesh is joined in the eye by this manner.
But nonetheless it behooves you to heal the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Veins are red that are covered over the eye, and they take from sight their work and weaken the eye every day. It is therefore the first that you look at the eye, in which it is, whether it is, and there is no other sickness except for the vein; therefore, the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your hand, then suspend those veins throughout all the area according to his knowledge, and let the lines be subtle double according to this form:
And let two lines be by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and make this work at the hour of midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, if distill in the eye kohl green and red to corrupt what is remained of the vein.
And if you do not have power to gather all these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pains are appeased and is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mire are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine burning according to those that I have before said, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, then take all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "sharp chief," and it is made from fire iron one chief point, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
If the joint is joined, and the flesh grows back, and the body of the bone is joined, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not renew and is not at all infected, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the shaft be thinned up to the head as you see here:
Then place it on the bone next to the eyebrow, and move your hand away from the eye one finger's width, then turn to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through those that come in this if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, then the matter goes into the nose; so is lighter thing for the patient.
of the eye's issue
When the eyes are open fully and there is no disturbance in the nose or diminution, then you must bind the patient; then heal, then put suction cups or a heater without hurting to suck, then put on the eye one linen made of wool, aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloth; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain by above a strong bandage, and resume suction cups to suck without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must strain it much; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not; then resume the plastering and bandages and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
of the displacement of a web woven
When a disruption comes in the woven web, then it opens and comes forth like pieces of resin, as if one were seeing; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part until that above, then thrust another needle where there is one double thread from the part of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the web together, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put on top a small piece of wool in abundance of an egg; and leave it until the threads fall with the web, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at no time is the wound restrained by the web on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eye gives a great appearance, then pierce it with the sharp instrument that comes from within the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and bring down the eyes, and enter into them immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
of the bulb of the eye
This illness which is called «alcunnati» is nothing else than a bulb that is assembled in the eye, appearing like a drop of water descending, and it is not truly water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on one seat prepared and straight, then take the head between your hands by two parts, and move it as much as you see the bulb come upward to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend it, let the light be undisturbed, and have the patient look at things as he usually does; and if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water, and if the descending of the bulb is not appeared as we have said. If so, make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and make on the cornea .i. point by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, until the bulb issues; and when it is issued, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fennel has been boiled and honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have seen the likenesses of the eyes in division, and what is necessary to perceive; so in work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and bind the sound eye and hold it very tightly; then put the paper of the eye to your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then put the point of the instrument near the crown by the width of a finger in that whiteness of the eye at the part of the lesser tear, then thrust the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and return your hand until it pierces in the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the parfont of the measure of the space that is from the pucker up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal cloth, and then put the instrument just to where the tear is, then express it out one way after another. If the tear comes down now, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest a little, and if the eye returns the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensconced and it does not mount, extract almagda gently by turning your hand poc and poc; and then put back into the eye a speck of gem oil, and leave of that oil inside. Then put outside the eye stuffed or linen moistened in rose oil and honey of egg yolk, and bind with the sound eye.  We, and those who are of our time, put on top as coming broiled with honey of egg yolk.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this is the form:
And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not pierce too much in depth, but make one subtle, then put almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient one pillow in front, so that he sleeps on his back in one dark place; and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in this same dark house, and test his vision, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not convenient that you do these things at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is convenient that you apply them, for that reason because the liquid rises quickly.
If an abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and address it of those who appease the abscess; and when it is appeased, then untie the vision and put on his face one orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house. And then he goes out of the house little by little, and converts himself in his affairs; and know that no disciples must interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they make almond perceive, so that one sucks the liquid, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the appearances of the forms of almonds, for those who do not know them they see them; and be of pure rain.
And let the head of each of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angles acute.
of the flesh from the veins
Sometimes veins are born or joined in various ways, for which reason some seem like scorpions with many feet; and if there is such a one where the flesh is  encrusted with a dark color, and also flesh of good color. In that vein then, which is sound, and not encrusted, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and put the ointment on those veins, and rub them outward; then cut that which you can hold with a very fine sharp spatula from one side, until you know that this flesh is entirely removed.
And if any thing remains that one cannot cover, open it all i.e., with instruments subtle and lightly so that nothing remains; and if without the swelling or abscess is caught, secure it as it is fitting; and if it are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is stopped and all the matter is removed, then pour on nettle or wine.
If the needle works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is clean; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is matter in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut; therefore it behooves you to put i. a thread of linen one pock thick, and be knotted by hands ours, and have between each knot a space of about an ounce or less; and put the patient's shoulder the thread in his nostril at the root, and pull it smelling until it comes out of the nostril into the mouth; and many times do children in schools this way, and it is light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold one head which comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other head which comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and feel one after another paying attention to those that are or thread. Do so until you know that the knots have corrupted all that matter; then pull the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of matter; and then put on the nostril a caine of cloth for some days until it is clean, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, whereby one distills the oils and medicines in the nose:
And let it be of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a caine, and conduct it so; and if you see fit, make a closed caine, and let the instruments be full for purging the head; and have one handle to the head for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the bone upon the joint
Many times a sickness is born upon the joint called "telul," and it grows and becomes large, so much that it is a terrible thing to see; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and extract all bone, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays in cutting until it is large, beware if it is hard, with dark color, of poor feeling: do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not dark colored, and you see that one can cut it all, then reassure the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with dry and restraining things.
When the joint is cut and closed
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these cartillagines ovraiges, it profits little, for in few men. It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh to all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already dry on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a suture, and restrain them, and powder on top of dragon blood powder, and ground incense; and put above the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other healing plaster, and leave it until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
To men's mouths, abscesses hard occur within, similar to grains of millet, smaller and larger; therefore it behooves you to turn the lips, and cut on each one, and take with tweezers and cut it in each part; then put the place after incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood is stained; and then the salve of this, and cure the place with dry things until it is healed.
Of the flesh of the gums
Many times flesh grows on the gums, that the ancients call "albulus"; so it behooves you to support it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and leave the wound or blood; then put on the place powdered vitriol, or other astringent and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times it occurs, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sores which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are putrid; so it behooves you to make the sick person sit between your hands, and his cheeks be in your palm, and clean the teeth or the sores that appear, until nothing remains there; and thus do of the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and the other stains, as long as they are visible; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good; if those do not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all cleaned; and know that teeth need various types of instruments to clean, according to what the work shows you, because the scraper with which one cleans outside the teeth has other forms than that which one cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with you.
It behooves you when you cure the tooth of its pain that you tarry with drawing as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; for it is a substance very high until such time as one has no excuse to clean. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth aching. Many times the pain of the patient, and thinks that it is a holy tooth, and treats the good tooth; and nonetheless does not depart at all the pain because of this, as long as the evil remains, because we have already done this to our seniors; and when you are well certain about the tooth aching, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth to its entire. A spatula strong to ward off the gums from all parts; then move it to your two or with fine pliers at the first point and point, as long as it is well dislodged, then firmly affirm the pliers; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking, and if it does not come out forcefully, take any of these instruments and put it inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with pliers, so that it does not break when extracting; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gums to dislodge the tooth.
And therefore be well aware that you do not break it, and remain a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not do as ignorant seniors do, who by their haste and by their boldness sometimes break any part of the tooth, and bring them nothing of what we have recounted; but they often bring by the action of this great sickness for the roots that remain, or for the tooth that they break, as we have often wanted; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if there comes a discharge of blood, which often happens, apply vitriol powder to the spot; and if this does not suffice, cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments, for which one must sharpen the teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of well-tempered iron, and be toothed for better grip.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the tooth, then it is necessary that you put on top of it moistened cotton wool in butter for one or two days, until the flesh softens, then insert the pliers which are called "algefri," because they seem like a bird's beak; and be inside made like a file and this is its form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say, a spatula, of which this is the form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, it is good; if these do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after here:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
and other iron tools which are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that many instruments are made of teeth; and also other instruments, which are not all counted; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases that the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks a bone or another bone, or can, then seek the instruments that are needed, as I have said to you, and help with gestures, by this is the form: And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then the king has all these instruments:
When the teeth appear not according to the body's natural shape, and the form is ugly, and even in young women, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed; then raze it; and if it is attached with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is here, and is like a small beak, and let it be of tempered steel, sharp at the tip:
And the coping piece by piece in hands a few days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then file with a similar file as this is its form.
And it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth piece by piece in hands a few days gently, so that it does not move until it falls; then make it smooth at the end without any burr, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front moves, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he does not bite, and you have cured them with medicines restricting, and those do not work; if they must be restricted with a gold thread, because the silver thread turns green and rots, but the gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too small nor too large, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth aligned, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the wires between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you come wisely to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the place where you began, and pull your hand gently and wisely, so that it does not move at all; and let the tie be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the wires of the thread with pliers, and join them together, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it tight as long as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the threads are torn, then restrain it with another thread; let it remain and serve thus until its end, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two loose ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, then it is put back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a tooth made of deer bone is made, and it is put in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
to cut the ligament of the tongue
At no time is this ligament which comes from under the tongue or nature itself, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound joined together; and the work is such that you operate on the mouth of the sick person, and he has his head in your lap, and he lifts the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament broadly, until the tongue is dislocated from its place; and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from a wound joining together, then put the awl and cut broadly that ligament; and keep that the incision be not too deeply made, for the artery which is below; and when you have done so, lift the level of hot water and honey, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and he will bandage the sick person every night, that the place may not join together. And if bleeding occurs, then put on the spot vitriol ground; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the smoky cautery, which is good for this purpose; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if you see it of dark color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, because it is a chancre; and if it is declining to be white, and there is moisture, then put the awl, and cut it with a fine spatula, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop in your work, then put on top ground vitriol until it is bleached, then return to your work until you have extracted everything; then lift the level of honey and seal, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Of abscesses in the throat
Sometimes in the throat comes boils that are called "godath," and they call them properly the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and of yellow color, then do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron, also for the shedding of blood; but let it alone until it is ripe, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is white in color, and the root is fine, then have your instrument prepared to cover, but first look whether the abscess calms down and is appeased. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be on your knee, and open the mouth and hold the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue below the entire instrument, for this is the form; and be it of silver or fine iron as much as a knife:
You press the tongue to the entire instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and place it in the almond, and thrust it upwards as much as you can; and do no thing with the cloths, then cut with the instrument, for this is the form, that seems a force; and however the head are curved, and one side to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or lead:
And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut it with pliers, for this is the form:
And be sharp on one side and the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and thus, and if a discharge of blood happens, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then care for it until it is healed; and at any time abscesses are born in the throat other than the two almonds, cut them therefore like the two almonds.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of small size; and I had well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one day or two. And the abscess was, I had mounted it so high that it had been put two fingers by the two openings of birth. I therefore hastened, and made in one a small incision, then pushed out the pus with force; then I made another incision in the other opening of birth, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after I inserted the instrument into these abscesses, and cut a part of it, and there came out only a little blood; and thus was the throat conduit of the woman unstopped, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; whereupon I enclosed it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and know only what God did with her after me.
of the grape
When the grape is full and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is short and round, it is called "grape". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus of the abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one which is round assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of yellow color or black, then it is necessary that you make a shallow incision in it. Because there is great peril to the patient. It is therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and of its length, that you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned before; then stick the needle in the grape, and pull it out, and cut it at one or two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; because if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to be cut, then it is necessary that you use him an instrument for the cauterization of his senses of fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp and acute.  And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses his tongue with the instrument which we have said or chapter of cautery, and confines with a very hot coal, so that it is not too thick nor too light; and employing the end of this instrument, for that reason this is the form:
And have or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the grape; and let the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle move from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the windpipe; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it burn and the mordications of the medicine be calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the channel above, until the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait after four or five days. And if you have need to recommence the cauterization of the medicine, then commence it again, and after the cauterization wipe around the grape, with cotton dipped in butter, and purify that which is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, unless the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysop and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or any of them in 1 pot, and put it inside, and make boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot have 1 instrument made according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and let one of the shoulders be put into the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the boil through the cane, until the boil is dead; afterwards resume it often, until the boil dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside its head a piece of egg so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times a bone or spine of fish or any thing is lodged in the throat; so it behooves you therefore to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit until the meat is cooked in the stomach; by adventure if it will withdraw the thing by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1 morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge 1 thread, and then swallow it; and when it will come to the place, it will be lodged, and then you will draw out further; and if it does not come out by what we have said, take 1 instrument of wood according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head held high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all does not come to life, nor push in the bone within; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, for because he feels where the thing is hoarse; so he pushes down, or he draws it out with all the instrument equally, as long as it is far.
of the throat's cut
No time is medicine the throat cut, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when these do not help, then look into the throat of the sick person in the sun, then that you press his tongue to the instrument that I told you. And if you see the cut, so treat it with all i. small pin, or with subtle pliers that are worth for this. And if these do not work, then take a heated dog hair, and put it into the throat of the sick person, then put in the end of the dog hair .i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the sick person is thirsty all day. Then take a full i. goblet of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it inside without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the cut feels the water, so it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will come down without tarrying. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take .i. pot where there are burning embers, and let the pot be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that insert the head of the instrument; then place your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the chain in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes until the throat; and the throat will now come down, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it be cured by this governance.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the throat is, when it can be seen, similar to tongs bent so as to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness from lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the form:
The chapter on abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes after in this book from one and the other; and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in .ij. manners which one is in its own likeness, and from those who hold moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body. Because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the boil is mature according to its completion; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints. Because when an abscess comes near joints, and one lets it stay as long as it is rotten inside, by chance the tendon and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it causes contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, then pierce it just as it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce an abscess that is ripe without complete digestion, except for the one that is near the foundation, so that it does not spread further, and be elongated inside, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of piercing the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and of the swelling and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where it is most dependent from the abscess, and where it opens outwards; and be the piercing long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no crease.
In these that are swollen, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is worth knowing that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, the body of the venom will be lengthened from it, and it will be full of much dirt; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of it. And if to any abscesses which are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart, and cover; when it has become as I. drapes, and is softened, it is necessary to do as with buboes: and if there are any that are cut in .iij. angles, and if there are any that one cuts like the myrtle leaf, like abscesses of the angres; and if there are any where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and seeming cuts.
Those who have no chief, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but one part; then stop the abscess until the other day, then draw nothing more directly; do this many times from great to great, until all the pus is gone; also if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man decrepit. For the spirit trembles at any time with the exit of the pus, that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take care of it. Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, bring in pieces of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that it comes one against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it inside, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and cure it with ointment as long as it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold and moist water, and wet one cloth, and put it on the place of bleeding many times. And if the bleeding persists, bring governance and care, and the powders that I have said in the hands in this book; and if it is during winter, and the place where the abscess is is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on cloths moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess, wipe it, and cure it as it is necessary, until it is healed.
And this it is necessary to know universally in the treatments of abscesses: for I have told you how one must go before the treatments of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of sores
Of sores
And the boil on the pus-filled and moist abscess, it is lighter, because they are of little blood. And if some of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these I copied one on a woman's head; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot be broken; and if one had done any to it, one would have done to it as well as a wound. In other abscesses coming or chief, there are those that come from the heads of children and from the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point, so that it may flow out better; and cure as is convenient.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groins, and sometimes come from other parts or of the body, and are bad, and are joined together. And each scrofulous is properly within its own skin, like the others and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malignant who do not want to obey health. In those therefore that you see of good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and mute from each part and is not harmful to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not very deep; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and it should be scraped from each side, and the two lips of the heart as one, if you need it, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and be not too much the spatula and trenching, so that the hand does not escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or some powders that restrain blood, and hold the wound closed; and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound softens, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, until you complete it; then look with your index finger if there remain any small pimples, if so cut them and remove them. And if there is a vein in the root of the pustule, do not cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound to old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut the whole pustule, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and stitch them now, then when there is no more superfluity for the size of the pustule. It is necessary that you listen to cutting the root of it, and drain blood, and stitch it as we have said. Those pustules which hold superfluity, pierce where it appears better; and pierce it like the one mentioned before, in depending, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment causing flesh to grow, until it is healed.
of scrofula
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
To those who have squinance, it is necessary that the opening of the throat which is called “epiglottis” be cut; and one does not help with those, because all the veins and the prominences of the patient are at those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in 2 almonds. When the illness is in the channel of the prominence, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below 3 circles or 4, a small opening through the middle, between the two circles or by the quantity of the opening of the syfac, not in the cartilage;
and those are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long of each other.
And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the opening, then split the keel as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that it jumps from the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open a piece.
And when the hour is passed for which one doubts strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew together alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says that one does not do this juice until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to death, and the fault the lung. Therefore cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
And for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the sickness has passed, and it has passed in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and care for it until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took one knife, and thrust it into her throat, and severed part of the channels of her windpipe;
and I was called by them to heal her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and well that it had not wounded a vein nor been led except by the throat, and the veins were exiting through the wound.
I hastened, and bandaged the wound, and cared for it until it was healed.
And it happened to the lady that she returned to her voice, and after that returned to her disposition.
For this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of a boil, and it is much in women;
and it occurs in two ways: naturally, and accidentally; where natural has no cause.
And the accidental [occurrence] is in two ways, one of which is similar to a fatty tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and there is fear of it, and it is not proper to work to make it worse than that which is small, and prove and search the whole introducer. if you find it as if our fat, and cannot into any vein, if you cut it, as we cut the ones, and the root to its whole crest, if there is one. and surround it well then, and care for it as it is proper, until it is perfectly healed.
of us
Many ways there are to us, of which I will say all the appearances.
And therefore it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is sometimes accompanied by fever and heat, as long as the fever has passed and putrefaction is complete, then rest the fever and heat.
With us there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains one cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes swollen.
and are according to two appearances, whether dry or moist, and very colorful as I said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the care of the wound, that you feel and inquire first of all the instrument which is called “entromissoire,” according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses is that you prick or moisten where you find the abscess, and turn your two points (of the instrument) and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess;
then remove the entromissoire, and take care in those who jump (out)
If moisture runs short, whatever its color, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if moisture comes after the probe, know that it is fatty, so treat it in a crosswise manner, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape it on each side and guard the area where it lies so you draw it out healthy with the knife.
And if you cannot draw it out healthy, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if something remains, it will return to us many times;
and if it remains a little while, and the wound grieves you, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and restrain the wound, and put on an overlying soothing plaster, hot, and care for it with other cares until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and care for it with those who make flesh grow.
and if the vein beating is contrary to you or another urgent matter and you apply the place of crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, as long as the wound weeps, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to covering those that are remaining from the other.
See here the forms of the introits instruments, and they are of three manners: great and medium and small; and there are three squares which are called “albaret,” and one which is called “breb,” and there are of three manners: great, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistula.
And they are also like needles with which one sews the garments, and they are of citrine iron, or of iron, or of silver, and the most valuable are those which are yellow, and they are more proven from black lead to enclose the swellings of fistula.
And they are of three manners: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of the pins are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are some pins that have two curves in three ways also.
And there are some pins that have three curves, and are also in three ways; and there are some pins that have two curves, and pins of a single curve, and they are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these is what one makes for cutting, and there are some that do not cut except on one side, with which we scrape the veins so that one does not cut a vein or nerve;
And of these introducers are the probes put in handles so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses;
and there are of 3 manners: great, small, and middle, as you see;
and one should not use it in any other place than the fleshy ones, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and groins, and similar places;
and never is one made of another instrument small, resembling the shavings of fistulas, according to this form, for which one evacuates blood;
and one puts it never in the place that is healthy to cut open the veins, and arteries, and never around according to this great form:
Sometimes breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, so that they appear like a woman's breasts.
and remain swollen and unsightly, and if anyone wants to cure them, they should follow this form up to line g. Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing decay, then bring together the two sides of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed;
And if the breast leans downwards and is softened by its size as it does with women, then make two incisions in two places above the ribcage; of which one be holding to the other at the end of the one and of the other, so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g. Then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of suturing and powders, and that which is necessary in the cure, until it be healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, for that the patient does not want to rest, or for the loss of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. and leave it until it moistens the remaining and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous nodules that have crusts, and some contain moisture.
Those therefore which contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from the line b. up to the line g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as before until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofulas, then make it as we have said in opening scrofulas, and if the wound reenters the fold, then administer cautery as we have said before.
Of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is closed, many times an abscess comes, and similarly it happens to an inflamed vein and abscess;
And if one knows this is because of the artery, then the abscess will be long in healing; and when you feel it at your two (sides), that is to say, restraint; and when this is for the vein, then it is reason of fire appearing.
and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and around the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is an inflammation of an artery felt through the skin from above;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is an inflammation of an artery felt through the skin from above; then operate on the groin, and beautifully depart the artery from the fabrics, as long as it is uncovered.
then put under it a needle, and make it go through to the other side, and draw out the artery with a double thread in two lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then prick the place which is between the two bands of an introducer as long as the blood flows from it, and be careful to cauterize the abscess;
then administer the cure that causes a boil, as long as the boil remains. then cure those [abscesses] with ointment coming from them, until they are healed;
And if the abscess is the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand as much of the abscess as you can to all the skin. Then pierce the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and let it go through, and there be .i. double thread, so that you pull it from the other side. Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or tie it from one of the two parts to the two ends of the thread.
And if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then insert another needle through all one thread under the whole abscess to the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four parts;
then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out of it, then cut the superfluity of the heart and leave what is tied
then put one cloth moistened in wine and oil, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until it is healed
of the abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the nerves when they are bruised, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips and in all their places where there are joints, and that is to say abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
and when one constrains it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in the middle of the body, but below the heart;
and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and the one who is in the joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go into contraction;
and the one who is on the head or forehead, make the skin  to the spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root.
And if it is large, suspend it with the needle, and scarify it, then drain it and stitch the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
Of large boils hanging At times they appear in the belly and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called “fungus” because of its resemblance to one, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and some very large.
and I saw one man who had two on his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had small root, and they were slightly cut, and pus came out of them
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces, and in the other 6, and the work in incision is that you look if the patient is wet, and the color of the flesh is white and moist and with fine root;
if you cut it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence the cautery to the fire. Because at the cutting often comes too great running of blood, and if the blood does not stop, then hasten you to cauterize
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take one thread of wool well made, and tie the joint as we have said, and let it be for two days;
And then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of wool until it joins the joint, and cease with it by no means work; and if the roots are large, be fearful of cutting even for the belly, but you may well cut half.
Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the tendon which is of a fawn color and poor sense and milk-like appearance.
For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the cure of ulcers after this.
when the wound has become
If the appearance of the wound comes from a cautery of a cut or tear of skin, and is on the belly and has no other wounds, such as in other cuts, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of wind.
And if it is through the rupture of skin and by the exit of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is because of the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its edges, it rebounds, and then returns, and perhaps it is tightened, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and for strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity;
and if it is due to windiness, it is puffed when touched, and the work is that you look if its appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. Then it is necessary that you leave the cure. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you or chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the belly, then it befits that you command the patient to hold his arm and be outstretched straight, then place your hand all around the belly. then command him to grasp softly between your hands. then go around the place that you have marked with the entire spatula. then extend half of the abscess upwards to the whole large incision;
Then work the half of the abscess extended over the linen, and put your index finger in it, and squeeze out its contents; If you find it caught in the linen, untie it, and bring the contents to the outside of the belly;
And if you find it boiled over, take it with the spatula, and cut away the excess;
and if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, so go well around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads, and put the two needles around what you have done in cross that you make appear.
then strain the abscess in four lengths over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them there as long as it purges, and let the dead flesh fall by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and purging, then cure it as is fitting, and shave the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is subtle and purging, then cure it as is fitting, and shave the abscess as we have said. and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of it as is fitting, and close the place.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work on them by medicines, and how one must shun the cure of iron; and let us say the ulcer is born in the marrow, and great caution to be had in its cure, and they said the ancients that when an ulcer is in a place where one can shave it like an ulcer which is in the nipples, and in the groin, and similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I have never been able to cure any of them; nor has anyone else ever cured any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then let him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then make the patient .i. a good place to do the work; then cut your incisions or ulcers, and shave the hair on all sides, and the bone on all sides leaving nothing; and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any thing, and if the running of blood goes contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched; then cure it further until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: so it is elicited solely; and one must not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hypoarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this likeness of dropsy which is called "elicited" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as gout and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: Lift the patient upright with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the pit, then take the spine-shaped spatula according to this form: And let it be sharp in two parts at the point, and nevertheless, do not make it so penetrating that it can come to the intestine when you insert it, and do not pierce it;
Then see if the dropsy is located toward the intestines: then it behooves you to make an incision beneath the rib three finger-breadths below the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to the liver disease, let the incision be on the left side of the rib three finger-breadths; and if it is due to the spleen, let it be on the right, and it is not proper that the patient lie on the incision that the superfluities do not flow into that weak place;
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and bring it out, and lift your hand all over the spatula between the skin and the syfac as when you are scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or more; then pierce the syfac until the spatula reaches its full length, and this is the place of the water, then pull out the tool and here is the form of it: And it resembles a fine silver needle, and it is made of light iron or bronze, and in the lower part one small hole; and on one side three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the pen:
At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately descends onto the instrument; then empty half or one-third of it, because if you empty more than is proper in that hour, perhaps the patient will die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will faint, or he will approach death;
But in void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the heart which stops the passage which is on the syfac, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering those, and treat of the water a small quantity;
Do this no day, and keep yourself from foiling until there remains but a little of water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you give him much water, then cure with earth or sand hot, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it stays to drink; and cure with medicines drying until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes children are born without any opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. So it is necessary that as soon as possible they can perceive a whole .i. spatula very fine according to this form: then put on the opening .i. clo subtle of plank, and tie it and hold it so for .iij. days or iiij. and when he wants to make urine, then remove the clo, and make urine, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose opening is small, if they are medicated with the clo of plank, as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in their place are blue, because none are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so that they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate for this reason because the matter cannot come up to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, then they place the head of the penis and the scrotum as if it were the width of a pen, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and beware of blood loss which comes many times, and if it happens, then the stanch from those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the member Many times come this blemishes in the member, and is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to prick them with .i. one sharp needle, and scrape and clean all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the blemish is malignant, of putrid color and stench, then it behooves you to bring cautery to it. When you have scraped it, and if the blemish is in the bottom of the member, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the blemish that is inside first; and when it is healed, cure the outside one. For when you cure it all together, there is not assurance for the head of the member that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its member and privy; so it behooves to clean away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of quince trees and veils, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then administer lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with two kinds of conditions together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption. And if the head of the member is corrupted and retracts, it behooves you to pour or conduct from the member a chain of plank, and have the patient urinate among them; and when the skin is sore at the head of the member which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it behoves you to scrape it with .i. sharp instrument, until the bonds are loosened, and the head of the member is free from all sides;
And if it is a grievous thing to consider these things, it behooves you to scrape them with one spatula at the root of the shaft and of the hair; then carefully separate between two, and put one subtle linen cloth moistened in cold water so that it does not dry out.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this operation by our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the easiest to heal.
I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the healers who made circumcision about one and a half, and with force, and with a whole novacule; so they cut the skin because there are two skins, and by adventure if one cuts the top and leaves the bottom.
Or it is necessary to cut, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is about one and a half, the point of the member is not safe; and at the purification of the angle by adventure escapes the iron, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted it.
From the purification which is done with force to all the length of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut justly as well above as below.
Car when you press your hand, so evenly in .i. all soul tense; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the penis so slightly, and then make him rejoice in all ways that you can; then make him be straight between your hands, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and blow into it, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is in; then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie it under .i.  piece a .i. other lien; and keep it as .ij. fingers by the second lienure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the .ij. liens, then lift the heart upward and pull the head of the penis;
then make him be straight between your hands, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the penis and blow into it, and pull it up as far as the head of the penis is in; then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the place signed with a double thread, then tie it under .i.  piece a .i. other lien; and keep it as .ij. fingers by the second lienure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the .ij. liens, then lift the heart upward and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow drop by drop, for that is the way to heal; and put powder on it and on top of the powder .i. drapeil glued with a yolk of an egg boiled destempreit d'aigue rose, cooked with rose oil both good and fresh, and let it remain there until the next day, and cure it from other cures as long as it is healed.
The form of the forces to the mundification is this: the two shoulders should be held and be pointed, and the shoulders are also as large as the hands equally.
The error of the mundification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the pus makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then you hold it with tongs, and then cut.
And if they pierce for three days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, let it alone until the abscesses are calmed, and lightly scar it; then cut it as much as you can move, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will do it no harm.
Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound with powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts the kernel beyond measure, and it goes upwards, it will do no harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
Urine retention is from an obstacle in the stones, or of blood solidified, or of bowels, or of new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not relieved, and you see the retention being from the stone which is in the neck or bladder opening, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on their knees; and let their feet be placed upon their back, and extend his belly from the part above his back, and restrain the patient's loin as much as he can; and therefore the neck of the bladder is constricted to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is relieved.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be of fine and light silver, like the quill of a bird; and let the stem be half a palm long, and let it be fine at the top.
And the manner of the issue of the urine is that you take one double thread, and tie at the head one pock of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread into the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
then put gently the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis from above towards the bulb; then push the syringe forward until the bladder, and feel the patient coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except for those who lead or where it goes is twisted; then is the thread to all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and do correct the urine;
and begin again the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient be aligned.
Of the bladder illnesses
When scabs or blood comes in the bladder, or there is rottenness assembled, and you see distilled water and medicines, so do to all the instrument which is called “clepsydre”, and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the  leus cheeks for which the medicine court should be such that it stops well the penis without addition, so that if it can be drained the moisture, and push when necessary;
and when you see to put your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the  keuster in the moisture, and draw with the drawing that is inside; so you will draw the moisture to the keuster, and then push back hard the drawing inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of lead, and the head is higher; and below at one breast or where the shoulder falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you want to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed of a double linen cord, and heat one part of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the member, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put one strong thread in these pierced holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles one dale (a type of coin), and put inside that what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have just said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as reins, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a cutting tool; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens more frequently to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears with gravel, and irritates the patient's penis, and he feels pain many times, and then urinates; and after many of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in the elderly, and is as moderate for those who are between young and old; and the cure is lighter from those who have a large stone than from those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, so that all the phlegm which is in the intestines is drawn out. Because it often hinders the removal of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and gently raise and move him downwards, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from its high position; then make him sit between your hands, carefully, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely sloping downwards; then touch the queue and the head with your fingers.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall when touched with all of your might, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and insert it into its foundation, touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your finger, and push it outwards where you wish to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the scrotum in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatula cutting downwards, for this is its form:
And making between that which is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight on the stone, and the two sides should be either above or below the foundation, and the waist should be made so wide outwards, and inwards narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the press if the two which are or foundation, that she jump forward without work; and know that there is such stone where it has angles, and margins: so is it grieves to extract; and if it is like a ball, rounded, whose outlet is light.
To that one therefore where it has angles and margins, make the waist larger; and if it does not jump, then you must extract with tongs which are also like a file at the head, so to constrain the stone that it may not escape; or put under it one instrument subtle curved at the head; and if you cannot manage it thus, enlarge one pock the opening, and if the stone is not dislodged, strain with vitriol.
and if there are more than one stones, first push the largest one to the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then pull out the larger, and afterwards the smaller ones if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be cut, and make a bigger wound. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the leak cannot be sewn; but nonetheless try to drain it, or to break it with forceps, until you draw it out in pieces.
and when you have finished your work, apply the wound to incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top one cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, wash the area well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphana and basil oil, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and congealings of blood in the bladder, and because of this the urine is retained, which is known in this manner that without jump with the urine: therefore you must put it in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and inflame it;
Then lift the wound of  acute and easy and of silk, and help him in all the ways that you know, as long as he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you bind his .ij. thighs together, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the rod goes, and fixed in it, and the urine cannot issue; so cure it as I say then, that you cut it many times, it is excused from cutting by this cure. I have already proven this.
Take one piece of iron according to this form and have it shaped into three angles on a stick:
Then take a string and tie it around the rod below the stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the stick into the rod gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the stick in your hand at the stone point by point, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side; soon will come the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the rod.  Then it is broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
And if you cannot do this because of anything that prevents it, then tie one string below the stone and another above, then make the rod upright to the stone between the two strings, then extract it out, and untie the strings, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It happens that a stone is engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, it is a grievous cure, and is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who discovers herself to the midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is so much deeper than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, then it is necessary that you take a midwife well knowing, and by pains find one. And if you cannot find one, point to a chaste midwife subtle; and present her with a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her from the incision of the stone;
And look well if the woman is a virgin: then it behooves her to put her buttock or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it below her buttock, and recommend that she put her buttock or con on the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, it behooves her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the con, where it is moved apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her buttock above or below the stone, and be the tail first small.
Then put the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so well the wound that the stone can be issued further, and know that many ways of stones are: namely, small and great and rough and soft, long and round, and which have veins. Know the resemblances to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not pass, put ground vitriol on it and hold it there for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of stones so that they help you in your work.
And if the stone does not pass, and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and strain it with bandages, and do not begin again those things, and leave the stone and do not try to remove it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the wounds are healing, then return to your work as long as the stone is out.
of fleshy hernia
Watery ramice is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is under the skin of the testicles, which contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have any other poc.
And the generation of this ramice is of weakness that comes to the testicles, and it is expanded that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is or white such as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, that is to say long as the shape of an egg, and does not open the corners, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the corners and the white such as this, one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture,  you should probe with all the intromitter that is beforehand shaped by what form. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then place him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the hips;
then take the spatule, and cut the skin of the hips between them from the long to near the elbow, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the hips until the white fat, and carefully peel it according to your strength;
Then pierce the sinus plain with water to one large opening, and drain all the water, and then put your bandages, and lift the sinus upward; and do not touch the heart of the tonsils, but only the sinus; cut all or by pieces evenly the side of it subtly, that if you do not cut it well carefully, it will return the water.
And if the uvula is in your work, set it back in place when you have finished the work of the sinus; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the tonsils with a suture, and then treat it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the uvula corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the tonsil to the whole suspension, and remove the uvula, and treat it as we have said.
And if the sharp point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two sprigs; if cut the other part like you did the first evenly, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened in rose oil;
and put another linen moistened in wine and oil, and put on the two pads, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it on all the linen which is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and employ them with woolen padding according to this semblance and be assembled by stitching in the crotch of the breeches, and one of the arms reaches onto the foundation up to the back, and the other to the part of the armpit; and the other two on top of the two shoulders, and let the whole restraint be assembled at the buckle of the breech;
And sometimes this branch of cautery is medicinally used in place of iron blades, and that you take one fine cautery knife-like, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it be heated as we have said, so that the white pulp that contains the liquid is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that pulp with one incision, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And cut in every way that you can, as long as you are scraping everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and moves guarding against bleeding, and movements than the works of blades;
and if nothing else makes you contrary, or abscess or discharge of blood or other thing, so cure what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the aquatic root is there,
then make the patient sit on one elevated seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below at all the spatula wide, and put the perforation long through the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let for course the remaining of the water to run out, then cure it as long as the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let the water flow into the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you put in a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrophics, whose form is above; and enlarge i. pock the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus will pass the days of the patient.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the section of this root there is fear in more situations, for which it seems to me that one leaves it better.
and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from the body, and even the buttocks; and this is by much cause.
That is to say by excess of sour and sharp, which is spread to the buttocks, or from percussion;
and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and is a serious abscess;
and by chance are some abscesses grim fearsome and stony, and of a fox color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or inflammation of vein.
When it is from our artery, then it is known by the arrangement of hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove that you touch it.
That one which is made of vein inflammation is known by its arrangement at the expression of the touch of the fingers,
and one can well do the cut on this sort of thing, and on the other bones. and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then place the leaf on top, and the trunk towards white fabric, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the leaf.
If the leaf is already softened with these new bones, then it behooves you to draw the leaf and cut it;
and if it is dry to the fabric, or in those who are inside the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all that part and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the bone is or its rear, then it behooves you to cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Of the abscesses of the testicles
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a sort of boar's skin, with the softening of the testicles, And the patient moves violently when he goes.
And the cure of this malady is as well-prescribed as the one previously mentioned,
and nonetheless we will tell you about its workings, according to what those who came before did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one raised seat, then bring the suspensory of the loincloth down to your two hands, To all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters of the hair, and the ones who stretch them.
Then cut with a sharp spatula wide through the place the vessels, until they are uncovered.
And then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
Then put a needle where it has one double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and tie it straight to the other end; Then cut the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted moisture;
Then cure the wound as with others where one avoids swelling, so that no vessel is cut which nourishes one of the corners;
For by those there comes no harm, and to all the vessels comes life, so it is necessary to treat the corners at all the vessels; So that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be aided.
of the rupture of the hip The occurrence of this rupture is by the section that comes from the hip, or the extension above the belly in the part of the angles, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this rupture is either from the hip, or the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes: either from percussion, or jumping, or carrying, or lifting heavy burdens, and similar things;
and the signs when it is from the extension of the hip, are that there is pain and aching, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscess is even unto the root, because the pus draws close to the intestine
And the signs are when this is of the section of the gut, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscess appears diverse, beneath the skin close, and this because of the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the gut.
And sometimes the bowels with the intestine, and are held in, and causes great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, for that reason it behooves to avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to put their intestine into their hand within the wound, if it can enter. Then either raise it up on his neck between your hands, and lift his hips;
then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the groin along long; then insert into the folds of the waist needles according to what you need in order to open the wound, and such that the intestine can be brought out.
then scrape away the skin that is under the skin of the groin, until the white layer underneath is uncovered on all sides;
then put your index finger in that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white layer underneath the skin of the vulva, and between the second layer;
and depart that which is behind the vulva, and between the second layer; and then move with your right hand into the center of the groin, and keep the white layer on top in your left hand, and lift the vulva to all the layer towards the waist; and command the minister that he extend the vulva upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligament;
and if it has a point of the intestine wrapped or white syfac hard, and if you find none of these things, put it in the belly below.
then take a needle or it has one large thread made of ten threads, and put it in the rear part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, until there are four threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong ligature of two parts. then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them together forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for an abscess coming to it; and put straight the linen according to the first linen long two of that one, and after these two linens leave from the side which is below the heart of the buttocks the length of one.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the buttocks, as long as the sinew, and the bone, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and put on the linen that we have said. And at no time is cauterized the white buttocks that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of excessive blood loss.
For this happens many times, and let the linen remain as long as it is dripping with him; and if it tarries at the chair, so be risen of hot water, and put on that which we have said, as long as it is dripping.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch I never saw anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below.
Then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who operate, as long as the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens them; and do not pull any of the intestines to the anus, and if there are any pulled out, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
And nonetheless, if it remains too long in this point, the wound or opening grows larger, as long as the intestines are outside.
and this happens by the extension of the fascia which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and opened.
and the cure for this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture swollen out to a width according to .iii. fingers;
and then extract the fascia which is under the skin that encloses it, then take the root and place it on the place appearing of the fascia;
and press on the front of the belly, then sew the two appearances of the sfaca above the top of the spine, and sew both.
then extract the top of the spine, and do not cut anything from the sfaca or extend anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestine's branch;
then cure it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if the wound is defined and cures the wound, until it is healed.
The sfaca is constrained, and has no appearance in the break, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the sacs that are inside are softened, and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips to a seam, and if you see, sew first the superfluity of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat the cure as other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the confinement
Know that confinement is common in our law, and for this reason I would like that I do not speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary for two ways: one of which is that the readers know how to respond when they are asked, and know the cure; and the other, because we often need confinement of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rams and other animals. I say therefore that confinement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. In the one that we do by attraction, we make our sit the animal in hot water, until the testicles are softened and pliable; then take them in your hand, until they are put back and you no longer feel them.  Of the tail castration: it is necessary that you hold the animal, and press the skin of the testicles in your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and cut on each testicle one cut, when you have well scraped them; and leave no hole of the scrotum and the fine scrotum that is on the vessels; and this way of castration is more mature than the one done by attraction, because at the attraction there may remain some thing of the testicles, because of which the animal desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodites are according to two manners as men: one if it is that between the two sexes appears as the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin as a penis and two genitals.  And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the chars attached all, and the cure so as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Of the tenting
Tenting is a wart on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure. It behooves you to singe the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and don't go too deep, that bleeding does not come from it, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; and there is another wart that is born at the mouth of the vulva, and the udder, and perhaps jumps off, and is according to the semblance of a cow, and for this reason they call it the ancients "cow disease". If it behooves you to cut it, as we have said the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thul; and we have said in the division the likenesses of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve treatment. I say that hemorrhoids and the thul, when they are taken from the margin, and they do not appear to the touch, except by cure with iron. Those who are at the mouth of the margin, one can feel them, are those that one can cure. It is necessary therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then eat the thul with tongs, and the cope in its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the air for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there is bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confide it with honey and aisil, and make one plaster on her back. And if it shrinks, it is good. If not, make her apply suction cups to her back and breasts without hurting; then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or blueberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. And when the abscess rests, cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to one sharp chief, so it should be cut as I have said about thul; and then cure it until it is healed.
Abscesses of the margin
Many kinds of abscess come to the margin, such as chancre and purulent abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes to the margin, which is not of the abscesses that boil over; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is ague at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it. Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let it die as long as the pain is appeased; and then make the sick person sit on one seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and rests his back on them and brings his feet closer to the outside of the leg; and let his hips be spread apart, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good linen band; then draw him towards the right side, and administer there the instrument with which one works the mouth of the margin, from which comes the form afterwards; and it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, that you first put the point in so as to know the depth of the margin, so that what enters into the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not pierce the sick person; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the margin with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt them; and it must put the cone of the instrument on top, and hold it tight. And when the abscess opens, and one pulls out by hand softly, then it should be cut at the head, at the spatumile leit; and when the boil is empty, it is necessary to put in the wound tentes moistened in rose oil, or green oil sec; and put the tent from the wound to the bottom of the margin, and put outside on top of the margin and on the cushion linen well moistened with water or malves are cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment before this, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the margin and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia are cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is reopened in the margin, then it is necessary that you guard against cooking iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
The midwife must first know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air: then she hastens the child to come forth; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it is the head first, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press her belly gently, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it comes up on its head, then the secondine comes with it, and the world is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes on its feet, and comes forth from the body or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes on its belly, or loin, and is converted by chance onto her neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how to help them.
If the child comes on its head by natural birth, and the woman giving birth groans loudly, and the strength of her is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and anoint her with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs with the little spatula whose form is here: And cut the secondine, and strike at its fingernail until the moisture that is within comes out; and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman of fenugrec with sesame oil; then make her breathe and sneeze with condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: so now the child will come out. And if the two hands issue forth, then it is necessary that you gently reset them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one seat, and lift her feet high up; then turn the seat upside down on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during the turning over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the hilt that is previously placed, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
from the issue of the child on his feet When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push upward. and then turn it back and forth, until it is even;
then prick one of the pieces and extend it back and forth.
Unless it jumps to the hips, as commanded to take, and that is made to sneeze with condition; If it jumps, God willing.
And if it is not so as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is easily set.
And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take a muzzle of aloe, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in one mortar; and put upon the nature of the woman within and outside this ointment, then make him sit upright until beneath the ribs
and when it is softened underneath, make him i.e. collar of myrrh, and put it underneath, and let him leave for an hour then make him sit on i. seat, then make him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take his belly lightly, for the child jumps now. from the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, then he puts his hands in and out.
of the birth of the child which comes out with one hand it behooves to contrive to bring back the hand if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise, and go.
If she cannot walk, put her on a bed. i.e., and make her legs straight.
then administer the ointment that I have recounted;
and if she does not give birth, put her on a seat, then study to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to the natural figure, and have her sneeze, and command her to gargle as long as the infant is out.
of the issue of the child upon its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned toward the back of its mother it is proper that the midwife hold its hand, then turn it bit by bit, and the ewe lightly;
and when it is equalized, she puts it on the flesh of the high muscle and oil, as we have said, then commands her to move it bit by bit;
and when you have done this, she sits her on one seat, and commands her to sneeze; and the girl sneezes. In this same manner to all the secondine
In this same manner to all the secondine When it comes to healing in this manner for all the secondine, cut the secondine to your fingernail, until the moisture is emptied.
And if the child can be raised on its face and neck, then cut from the head so that it is not retained, and kill the child.
Then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she shall not become pregnant again.
of the separation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they can be named;
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are divided by the staff that divides them, which is tied to the board.
And sometimes they come out as naturally as one under another, as we have said.
And if they come out roughly, so the cure as we have said, and let the bail be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make thus as it is worth to salvation. of many children
of many children At no time are formed in the marsh i. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii., or more up to xv., and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage,
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all this because perhaps similar things happen; so it is done according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman of a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; if it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death;
if it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips inclined downwards, and her legs raised;
And the minister the braid of two parts, where it is bound to the bed so that it not be pulled at the descent of the child
Then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with musk from aloe and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mulscillations Then put them in the mare lightly, then want one or two places where she puts her hooves that are suitable to those
And take ward if the child is appeared that it descends upon its head; If he places the forceps in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs
And if the descent is on the feet, he places them or pokes them and in the middle ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the forceps in his right hand, and place the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and push it with all his hand lightly, and place the forceps in any one of these places we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
Then place against one other bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
And then make them equal by moving one side and the other, so that it may pass easily, and let the bones be toothed to hold it, as in this form.
And if a part remains, then put some of its oil in the wound, and push it into that part, and pull on the other part.
And if none remains, then put that bone or higher up where it should be, and do this until it all comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening, then you must envelop it with, that is, a cloth, until it is whole.
then cover it at the joint of the root or at the knife edge, and thus you must do in the other hand, and so on.
And if the child's shoulder is thick and it sticks out at the exit, or if it has a sharp head assembled, If it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two [parts], and make the head [and] extract the liquid. or you take it with the instrument which is called 'almidach', because its form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
and in the same way do it if the infant has a large head naturally; and then draw further the bones with pliers;
and if the head leaps out and is forced back, it may be split, as long as the moisture that is or worse has issued forth.
and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the delivery through the mouth of the womb is easy.
And if it is stretched in the belly or in the breast, then it behoves you to withdraw it that is to say wrapped with a cloth around the hand; and make the belly or breast, until the moisture which is there is cured.
and if the other members are put back in place, and the shoulder remains; then force the patient to raise his hand until it reaches the mouth of the joint; then he puts one or two, and the treatment is done
and if the mouth of the abscess is contracted because of the heat cautery that has come to it, then it does not need to be worked otherwise, it is necessary to administer moist and fatty things; and he administers poultices, and soak in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, then administer what we have said in a living child;
and if one has no power over it, then the body be cut into parts, and leave nothing of the secondary part.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said about abscesses that come in the groin;
and if bleeding occurs, let it be put in water restraining, and administer other cures to him.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been dead, then conceived one other upon that, and refused death the others. After long time there came an abscess in the belly, and inflamed so much that it opened, and began to great suppuration.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long time, and could not suture the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there came out one bone, and after some days another. I was amazed greatly, for this reason because the belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound, and in my hands were bones, as long as the woman was getting better. And I saw the woman for a long time like this, and it seemed to her a little bit of good from there;
and I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when masters find a strange thing, that they know how to help.
to bring the bone back to its place
Here after comes the form of the presser, which is what we have in the books; and to two turns at two shoulders of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be i.e. two wide, and the margin of the trees i.e., one must, and in length a palm and a half. and among the two limbs be adjusted two fastenings of this same shaft, which be fastened in one and the other, of half a palm in length or a bit more;
and these two fastenings are put into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its appearance more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood shaft, according to the likeness of tongs; and it has two heads two adjustments, as you see, of one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the mare with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on one bed, the feet hanging and the legs spread open, then put the two adjustments adjusted together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand on all the instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the mare, as long as the patient does what she wants.
This instrument is all surmounted, and their likenesses are multiplied; and when the mirror shows them well, so much more hasty is the work, and higher as to men for their quantity.
So do not despise the instrument that you have not shown it well, because its need is not excusable.
When the secondine is held during childbirth, so it behooves you to command the woman that she retain her breath, and then make her sneeze from condition, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose. And if she jumps because of this, well is it.
If it does not come to this, take one pot, and make one hole or cover in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury;
All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put a string or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh,
and keep it so that the vapors come inside the marsh; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If the second one sneezes hastily. And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more strength, command the woman to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in ointment of white lead, and then put it into the wound.
and grasp the second one; and when she has found it, seize it and extend it piece by piece straightly, so that the thread does not fall out during extraction. but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pull; then it will come and unravel itself.
And if the mouth of the thread is too tight, we have said the cure of sneezing, and fumigation of herbs;
And if it is not of all that we have said, then guard that you do not use for the milk.
But it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the mare, you tie him to the hip of the woman, then the clysterize with ointment tetra-pharmacon.
If she will bear it and return, and come back in health; but nevertheless, when she bears it, evil smell comes to the stomach and head, and makes the patient pale.
So it is necessary then fumigations suitable to this: none of the ancients have experienced the use of fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument for which one uses to fumigate the woman in order to hold back the flowers and the second-born is this:
And it is of glass appearance like a dog, and one puts the tip into the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
And let the fumigation be on the embers, and the wick as long as it is burnt, and begin another one.
To examine the foundation
Many children are born who don't have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by some subtle syfac: so it is fitting for the midwife that she pierces that syfac to its right, and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and keeps the bandage so it doesn't touch it;
then put on soft cloth in wine and oil, then the ointment dressing until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it doesn't close up again, then put a piece of cloth there, and leave him for five days, and remove it when the child wants to go into other rooms.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from a swelling of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that swelling; if it be cured, as we have said of the cautery of lead.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas which come from under the foundation are nodules, and larger than those which come from near the outer foundation, or in the space of two parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is ancient, it works, and still has moisture white or subtle pus,
And sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who have them or excretion or wind when the patient expels and perhaps some jump out.
And if the fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to half of the penis; and reach to the junction of the hip, and to a point of the groin.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing: and that you put your two index fingers or foundation and put a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when it is not twisted.
And if it has torsion, put in a tent of fine wool, or one horse hair, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through the opening or windiness or matter, as we have said. know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urinary duct, if it leaks urine and cannot be closed by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes up to its place. If there is no twisting and the pain in the area, then it is that it is bowed and there is no medicine or treatment by ointment.
And in these fistulas, there is no cure other than work and the vanity of fools who interfere with them.
In those that are not pierced and are not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put in an awl of iron, or of lead if there is crookedness, as far as you know where the awl comes to.
If the patient feels it around the base, then it is necessary that you put your index finger on it;
and feel then that the awl has pierced it; and whether it is discovered or you feel between your finger the bone or cartilage, then know that it is passed; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
It is said however that one can well heal none, but this happens rarely;
and the aid one makes it, if one carefully applies the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and heat the entire area in the fistula, until it comes to the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred materials are burned, which resemble an eye's feather;
and then the cure of tents moistened with butter, as long as that char is extracted, then the cure of ointment enclosing flesh and soldering
If it is healed thus, that is good. Otherwise, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the point which is the foundation, and between your point and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or of pus, and you see the fistula at this which follows the covering of the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward ahead of the tent, and then the cautery after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
And will be delivered the tent, and will shrink; then make up those feathered things that seem a feather of an oiseau, and remain nothing.
And if the sin goes taut, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: namely, the burning of those joined parts, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture;
then the cure with tents moistened in butter or in crushed things, until the wound lies low, and it appears that the burned parts are in the low part;
then cure the wound of the eyelids with hardened flesh and they are dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes to the very bottom and is separated from the body, you put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire there.
If you feel the tendon and between two is the membrane or silk or char, where it is close to piercing, then there is only a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three manners:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put dressings and cure it like before.
and do not cut too deep, so that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and let the excretions come out by its own will. then cure it as we have said.
then cure it as we have said. perhaps then it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound after it has been cut to the bottom, or with a dressing or other pointed instrument. Then define the charged flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation: it is a lighter thing for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies outside the foundation near the skin above. if you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And it puts one twist of thread into two, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is placed in the margin of the bottom of within, then extract the thread from that one pierced, just as you put your two or foundation.
And treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two pieces together, and hold them together, and let it rest for one or two days;
And restrain it every time, until the threads close up these holes that are between two, and stick together;
then heal the wound until it is soldered and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
For it does not behoove to make a stitch closure if it is too deep, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula for which one makes the fistula is very good of one part and trenching; and on the other hand no, because of this one should not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are inside the fundament, as if grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and sometimes they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have less moisture,
and moreover add a drop of yellow water or a drop of blood, and have the color of the body;
and the treatment of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch himself in order to go into chambers, as long as the foundation lasts and the threads appear; if you hasten, and can hold it with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the forceps cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with one draping cloth, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and restrain them to your two hands, then cut them, and powder above some hot powders that are in the place of cautery. and cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed.
and if the base cannot be released, then have the patient give a cleansing and harsh enema to wash what is at the base, so that it can come out freely.
and if the patient strains themselves, and if the thread are hard from the base, then the cure is light. and it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread and put it into a needle, then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood;
then place on the foundation one layer moistened in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
And then let them until they weep, and when they are dry, treat them with ointments and other remedies until they are healed.
Of the drying of the veins or foundation Many times there occurs drying of the veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is of no avail.
Then it behooves you to scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, so that it doesn't let moisture in; then heal as much as is proper;
and if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scraped. then heal until it is healed.
about trembling A formice is a small appearance made before the body, and goes much through it.
And sometimes it is found cold, and one feels it also like death from coldness, and comes in the whole body, and more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a cane from an ostrich feather, or a vulture feather strong, and put that cane on the coldness, until the circles purple the coldness entirely. Then turn your hand to the whole cane until you stroke entirely around the coldness, and put it through it, and scrape the coldness from its roots.
And if you see, so do this of a hound's of iron or iron according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above.
Nor let it pierce, for to keep the two, and move pressing And if you see, so cauterize the fringe, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster Never is a clyster made of silver or brass, or molten iron or mesh; and never is it made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those then who are administered in the care of children and who are feeble and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied in this manner:
And there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced inside; and on one side two openings, and on the other one;
And be the belly where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small openings;
And between each opening one must put space, then put in these openings one strong thread of a twisted thread for ten or as much as it will enter, and assemble the belly so like a sheep; And when the medicine is inside, one binds the opening with a strong thread in front of an instrument, then clisertize; and this is the form of the circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently.
Then the ministers squeeze it with their two hands together, until it is all emptied, then withdraw the clyster and raise the patient's legs to the side.
and if the medicine wants to work well, let the patient rest as much as they can; and if he sleeps one night altogether, it is more help.
And if you give him an enema for the disease of a falling belly, and the medicine is eager to work, let him restart it until he is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at their base, or abscesses, let the enema be as subtle as for one child;
and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicines, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places or where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by striking of stone, and cutting of sword and knife, or of lance or club or arrow, or similar things;
or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it's from a stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you heavily doubt an abscess is forming: if the fever comes immediately from the head itself, even if it bleeds little from the wound, and blood is drawn on the contrary to the diseased part;
and avoid the patient’s repletion of wine and thick meats.
And if he does not want to be bled, let his meat be lessened, and he drink no wine, nor eat much flesh;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in wine steeped;
and if there is no abscess hot, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I shall say a little later;
And if the art it moved, set upon some ointment, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with tents, then assemble them with stitches, as I shall say for the wounds of the belly, of the stitching.
If the wound is open to the bone, and gaping, and holds only at one point, then cover it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked wheat, also poultry, and similar things.
And if you find rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, so cut away all the rot, and throw it out, then treat.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which does not close without surgery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cauterize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put in this powder which heals as soon as the arsenic has been applied.
And the manner of the powder is: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely. and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
and then cover it well, and leave it uncovered if it doesn't swell; because one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And no times is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the ash has cauterized the wound.
And if the fire cauterized the wound, even if it was still bleeding, do not put this powder on it.
But put on some boiled medicines, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it weeps. Then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract the splinters carefully;
and I will tell you after this the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal and do not put anything restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; And do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let the medicine be warm, such as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cupped wash also in sweet water. And other minerals according to this manner, and moistened ointments.
And if the wound is large, so stitch it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and the head is raised and full of blood, then pierce or lower.
And if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize it as is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the guts, and the conduit is guarded, so that the meat goes, then sew the heart on the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form; and then the restraint happens often, and let him for some days, then the curing of ointments drying until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so be it; and if there are pieces of bone, then you treat them fiercely all that you can, and those that you cannot get, then leave it as long as the wound is rotting. and be sure to cleanse and align the opening;
and if the wound is fresh, put powder on it as I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of a sword or knife wound
If it's a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, look at the wound for signs of windiness as the patient breathes: then know that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then put nothing to it in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain deep. and return to the heart, and appease the patient; but I put attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then put in the wound old cotton to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there does not come any spasm, nor evil trembling of heart, nor dragging of the arm; and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is saved. Treat it therefore with tents and other treatments, as long as it is healing;
and if it cannot heal, and work, know that there is a fistula; then treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, then treat it according to what has been said before.
If it is large, stitch it up; and if it is small, apply powder, and if it is deep in the bone and has broken off pieces, then treat the wound, and pull out any fragments that are loose. And if they are not loose, let the wound rot, it will ease the extraction.
And for other wounds on other members, judgment is made as we have said.
Of the derangement of the belly
The derangement of the belly is great and medium and small;
Of the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, leaps out, by which its intrusion into others;
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes worse the small wound than the large,
for this reason one puts back the intestines in, if one does not put them back warm by warm; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they enter in less easily,
and for this reason the middle wound is worse, for this reason one resets the intestines to their place like the other two.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to .iiij. manners:
The .ij. common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the suture of other wounds of the body and .ij. other sutures proper are common to other wounds;
and nonetheless they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has come out and it grieves something to put back in, then this is by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in water with juniper and spice. and remove the intestine as soon as the swelling is gone;
and no time makes this kind restraining, and it is moved that alone to deflate.
And when you see the swelling depart, so moist the intestine with water or ale and barley be cooked. for by those it is aligned the entrance to a little thing.
and if it cannot enter there, so make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which one treats hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is to move the waist. That we must not cut there without great necessity.
And this is the instrument for splitting it:
If you cut inside at the curve and not outside, and see here the shape:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes if it is put back inside according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the strength to do so, because it is worthwhile.
When the wound is large, and it is in the area below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if a rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you place your attention on that which the sunken part is higher than the other;
and thus it behooves to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds, apply that which has appeared to you
Then take in your hands one minister pitiful who keeps all the rupture in his hand and assembles the lips; and this is the common manner of suturing,
and this is the common manner of suturing, and that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound  i.e. a space, and put in a needle where it has i.e. a good strong thread; and pierce the two holes of the skin with the two holes of the shaft,
then the straining of a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together,
and then leave one point's space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be middling, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well; For this reason, they ought to be shortened.
and it is not right to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin.
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the stitching;
and then trim the points of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the shoulder of the needles to keep them from moving. and let them stay until the wound is closed.
and this manner of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two is sufficient there.
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two pieces of skin and the two pieces of flesh together with a needle where there is one strong middle thread; and when you will have pierced these four pieces together,
and when you will have pierced these four pieces together, then thread the needle back to where you started, in the manner one sews the clothes;
and put space between each suture the thickness of a finger's joint.
this suture seven men,
and I sewed a wound one man had on his belly,
which was slashed by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it was of intestines well two palms wide,
and the wound was in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been for twenty-four hours,
and the wound was sutured until the 15th day, and I treated it, and it healed.
And they had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in one place where we found none, nor any medicine; and I applied half a finger more on the wound cotton twice a day, and I washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and thrust it from the outer part to the inner part;
When it has pierced the center straight in, there lay the head of the thread or suture where you have thrust the needle.
And make it pierce from the other side, from the inside to the outside;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the furrier does with furs. and that you leave once the syfac on one side, and take it up on the other, until the stitching is entirely complete.
The second manner of stitching, as Galens says properly,
is like how someone makes a bond, that joins the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the stick to the other end, in such a manner:
Insert a needle or stick of miracle near, and have it felt by them alone, and leave the two ends of the stick; then turn the needle, and have it felt from the outer part to the inner part, as .ij. shoulder bones
then make it examined the one and the other of the outer part up to that inside, in two other bones of the collarbone that are on the other side;
and this is the most common way of suturing and the most usual.
The Gauls say this word, and none testify to it
one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each
and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the suture is more dangerous than those of the other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh at all its blood, so that the artery has moved, so put back the intestine, and sew it up; then put on top of it powder with an herb
so put back the intestine, and sew it up; then put on top of it powder with an herb and if the artery has moved, so put on top any ointment that is present, as long as the wound heals; and bind the thread, and let the sutures close, and the mirach. then cure the wound like the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, put on it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it is healed.
Because you do not need other medicines for many cases when the wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound does not heal well with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten the limb lightly with oil of temperate heat, or with rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or rot in his bowels, and many times it happens. if they administer enemas of black wine, and similarly if the rot comes as far as the intestine;
and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is rotten, and it is for the placement of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the probe jumps from the wound, put it back in as if it were the intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and has turned black or red, then it is necessary that you tie the part that is black so that bleeding does not come from it. for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the bones and put the two heads hanging from below the wound to the outside so that they align during extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is rotten, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some men,
for I have seen that some men were wounded or their belly pierced by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and through it there came excrement and flatulence;
I took care of him according to what I could, and did not cease to treat him until he was healed, and the bones joined.
And when I saw him healing, I doubted that the patient had evil in his belly. and he had no ailment, but remained in better disposition, and ate and drank;
and said any experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a manner: Take fresh threads of large stitches, then assemble the lips of the wound. And when the thread has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips,
Then put one other piece after it in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered.
And stitch up the wound. If this happens in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient,
and if one can tie up the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from an animal's intestine,
in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is well cleaned, and then tie to the head of this thread i.e., a thread of fine twisted linen, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the rupture;
and this manner of stitching of veins is not otherwise than according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the lower intestines, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is pulled up and bent back.
And a fistula is according to truth a knotted false growth hard and white, where one feels no pain, and is also pulled up like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in its clear leap it bends back, and other times it's thick; Some times little, and other times enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or because of his malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, that does not allow flesh to be born; or he has too much swelling; or the matter is rotten and of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and late for health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Therefore it behooves me to make you know the cure for fistula which is done by work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body. For there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the bladder, or at any of the ribs or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are this way are of grievous healing, and there is only labor and ignorance.
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it known, if you take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, if the other curved;
and if the fistula is crooked, then surround it with a fine tent of lead, because lead bends and follows the curvature;
and if the fistula has hands pierced and you cannot search it well with tents, if you cleanse it through one of the openings,
because moisture spreads from one opening to another, and purifies it;
then carefully probe with your finger, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and whether it is closed off by them,
And ask the patient well about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
And when you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the fault and corrupted matter which are within. and then the care until it is healed,
And if the fistula is deep and straight, then you should cut it deeper as much as you can. Then put wets tents in a medicinal ointment, and put them to the head of the fistula
Then put wets tents in a medicinal ointment, and put them to the head of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the excess that is left at the bottom.
and then I put an ointment of soothing flesh, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
And if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it out. If a vein or nerve does not strike a principal limb, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean it as long as all the corruption is removed, then treat it with things that prevent flesh from growing until it is healthy.
and if it does not heal and returns bent as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
if you uncover and want as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healthy, that is good. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other means than to let nature do its work.
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with tongs, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, remove them all, leaving none behind;
and if moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, if you cope with moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place upon the wound something preventing rot, and leave it until the flesh rots around the bones,
and therefore they will have more easily bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you remove only the corruption until all blackness is gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of corruption, and comes to the flesh of the bone; if it must be cut and covered all the way to the corruption, then treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was one young man about thirty years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body
as long as the substances came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no outward cause to open;
but the surgeon by his folly opened it so much that the abscess opened, and from within oozed a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all festered with dampness and moisture from the body;
and many a year they take care for two years, and there is not one sage in the art of hands,
until I came to be called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and those who cured by the pores with great care; and the body of the youth became red from the heat of it, and had a citron-yellow color.
I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore stuck in, and dug into one of the holes until I discovered part of the bone. and I found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming up to the bone inside.
I was he who showed me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
and I began to restore the wound with medicines boiling for long time, and it could not be sutured;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I took it out, and tried to suture the place;
but I could no more than I touched around a palm of the bone, and it was drawn to all its strength. then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and united quickly,
and it was no longer necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure and for the fear of death that I had of him. For often blood evacuation is made, but it was healed entirely.
For often blood evacuation is made, but it was healed entirely. And in the place of the bone there came hard flesh, and it was of good disposition and had no annoyance nor opposite at all in any way, neither at present nor to come.
and extend the head so that you pull the corrupted flesh towards the bottom. and uncover the skin in the place where you see it should be, so that the pus does not cover the skin; and put one coal or a board under the bone so as to cover the corrupted flesh. And it is necessary to be as careful as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be even more careful at other times.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh completely; then put one coal underneath,
and then let it pass from one part to the other, the corruption, and be the thread of the corruption long, i.e., a point, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and thread the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is nothing else to cut;
And if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or the finger of the foot, it is a very difficult thing; but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you. and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose you;
and know that the instruments and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; And for this, it is necessary to prepare each kind of instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to what is proper.
of fire The shoulder can dislocate either from within or from without;
and when you have medicated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit at all, then it is fitting to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, if that the patient escapes by those of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
if that the patient escapes by those of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after the blackness, then there goes that corrosion of limb by limb and takes hold of the whole body; if you are hasty in treating it,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar.
if the corrosion is at the top of the thigh, cut it, and do not allow space for it to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, cut it with a knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death. and does not require treatment other than the amount of its virtue;
And thus do as when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, cut after the other joint;
and if it comes on the foot, cut the whole foot; and if it mounts into the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient die.
And the manner of covering or bandaging the limb is that you bind it above and below. and extend some bandages one from the lower binding, and some other bandages the other binding above. and you will separate the flesh that is between the two bindings by one spatula width, so that the bone is uncovered.
then cover it or so, and put on each side one drape of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess  shoes.
And if bleeding comes when you work, so cauterize the place thoroughly, or put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corruption first came in his heel of the foot, so much so that it consumed the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he raised his foot to cover it, and was healed.
and long time after that the corrosion returned in his hand, and he came to me.
and I placed on him things which were applied over the wound after the cleansing of the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
and he begged me to cut off his hand, and I refused, because I had hope of applying a remedy. and also if he cuts his hand, that he does not bleed for the man's virtues were weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have recounted this story only for this reason, so that one might do otherwise if they need to.
At times an abscess comes to its fleshy place, and stays so long that it causes great gathering of bowels. And then rots and breaks through, and in jumping the bowels, and remains its place, like vessels. And the skin which is above is also as thin as .i.  fine drapes. And they do not reach until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a malady is called "saint".
but if it is so elongated that it comes as far as the bone marrow, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thin, like a piece of cloth; and it will not be able to spread any further with its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not complete. and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat with a clyster thus:
Look if the breast is large, and the bowel within it is of foul stench, then clysterize with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: Take therefore, oil, and litharge, equally, and put to boil in one vessel over the fire. until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and in a clyster administer it, and restrain the flow. and let the medicine remain for 2 hours, then extract it by squeezing.
Do this many times, until the pains subside and fear is gone.
and at no time is a clyster of ashes water administered. when this medicine is not present, and you take the ash from vine wood and pour water over it.
then the bowel, and in a clyster, as long as you know that the breast is well-moistened;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey where there is a piece of litharge ground; or you may clyster him with honey and mellowed wine, for honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the healthy sore;
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well purified, if the clyster of those that brings forth meat in it,
and is that you  apply a plaster defined, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, about which I have spoken of the properties or treatments of ointments.
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the nozzle of the enema cannot enter it, then enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in an ointment Egyptian tent. or ointment of basil, as long as it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, so the cloth and let it be only where the clyster can enter
And if the opening that gushes is above, so cut or lower its level than it is. Because when the boil is in full, do not let matter harden inside; And if you cannot cut out the whole thing below as you wish, if it is arranged in such a manner that the belly goes to the lowest place it is.
and if you are not able to cover the breast below as you want, if it is arranged in such a manner: that the belly goes lightly down, and let nothing of the belly; and take consolidating medicines to put over the chest
and extend i.e. a linen cloth that covers the entire chest; then cover with forces in place the opening of the chest i.e. a little more wider than the first, then extend ointment softened on another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the wound of the chest to align the ribs, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once.
And he who is in the wound of the chest, often removed to take out the rib, and know what comes from the rib, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see nature leaps upon the chest wound, if you know that the breast is healing already, and approaches health;
and then untie it in the morning, or the third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change one other cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bowed indigestible after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, so do not despair of health.
because health approaches. Because there are men whose pains in their wounds take a long time to heal and those who do the opposite;
and if the breast lies bowed indigestible after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
and if the breasts are slow to heal and are swollen, apply drying medicines both in substance and in virtue. as for ointment diaphinit, because it contains a large part of vitriol, and it is the last remedy;
Take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
then boil and use it; and the same thing is made honey boiled mixed; when inflammation  is finished
and you take mire and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire. and then you glue it one cloth, and place it over the chest, and no times administer it one long  aristolochia. and roots of the celestial lily, which is also as flour of quince and centaury;
and roots of the celestial lily, which is also as flour of quince and centaury; and in using simple or compound remedies: grind them, and make it into powder, and put it on the honey that I said, and use it. and if the wound is stretched out, and is not healed by this treatment,
and if the wound is stretched out, and is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption is going deep, and makes impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the ankle
A panaritium is an abscess that arises below the fingernail of the hand. or of the foot, or by chance arises in other parts;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then there comes one abscess after another. and they thrust and cut the bone until it reaches the root of the joint, and perhaps all the way through.
and the corrosion comes to the bone until it causes a painful aching, and the shoulder is two fingers wide, and the color is bluish.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all then it is necessary that you cut away all the excess that has remained from the joint with iron then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh and starts to prick, and the blister, then it is necessary that you put a bit of ointment under the nail that pricks the flesh, and the top part, and cut this carefully and lightly. and put on the rest of the medicine ardent and corrosive to remove everything.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and treat it further, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
and if you see the two halves are corrupting, then cut it into one as we have said before then treat it until it is healthy.
and if it is broken, and bruised, and it causes great pain, then you must first heal it then cut the angle of the spatula knife cutting across above
and guard that the tail does not come until the flesh which is below the bone, for the patient would feel too much pain;
And if it happens, put something above which soothes.
The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy. and by chance there is some where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail.
and none of these [grow] in the root of the joint, where the base is in no one's two. Those who are born in any of the two parts do not move. and those who are born at the joint of the two, by chance may move.
The waist of that one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: waist it in its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: so you hold to be cut.
In he who is born or must at the last buttock, it is necessary that you cut first the round flesh until the bone, then set the bone with a suitable bandage to it, then treat it until it is healed.
The wounds that come from two assemblies come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you set that solder, so that the parts repair according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not join together. or you put between two pieces of fine planks, until the bones are joined, as it is fitting.
If the joints come together with any of its two hands, then bind that joint as it is fitting.
Of vil
Veins are thick envelopes full of melancholic superfluities that come in more members of the body;
and more often occurs in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer to him once purging with coles, and then the herb of basil.
The treatment of iron is thus in two ways: one is with the cautery, and by burning out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and burn it all over.
The waist is thus according to this manner: first rise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the hard flesh is softened. Then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee; Then cut the vein in one place, or in two or in three, of a wide size,
Then elevate and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as long as so much flesh issues as the virtue of the patient can endure;
and then tie it up, and command him to be clothed with meats avoiding black mold;
And recommence the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The raising of the leg from the patient is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is a lot of hair, then put it in warm water, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bathing vessel, then warm it over the fire, and then apply it to the vein’s length from the arm to the knee, or in the part below the ankle.
then work the skin with the scalpel, and scrape the vein on each side until it appears when you feel it.
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white cord;
then push the point underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then place it gently on the scalpel,
Then he cuts it in one other place above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it is open then raise it at the source, as you have done, and put it on another incision, as you did first;
Then cut another notch, or more if you need them, then raise it, and cut at the bottom of the two feet;
then pull and raise it until the second notch; then extract it notch by notch, until it is all out, then cut;
and if you cannot draw it out and raise it, then insert a needle into it of a strong thread doubled. and pull it and draw it out, and insert under one rib, and turn your hand this way and that, until it emerges; and guard that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out or raise it, and the patient comes to great harm;
and when you have drawn it entirely out, place on the wound site wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if it is necessary that you break it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you break it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to break the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut into the vein;
and is of great curve, for if it were fine, it would cut into the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is in the legs, in warm parts where it does not grow herbs nor trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance, it may be born in other places than the legs, and this happens because of rotting that comes from under the skin,
as it comes from inside the body of snakes and worms, lodged between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the color changes, and the vein begins to swell outward, as if it were the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens up, then you must wrap around it a piece of plank from 3 and a half to 2 inches, and there,
and leave the plank against the leg, and every time it hurts at the outside, then wrap around the plank, and there, And if it is too long, cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely out. For if you cut it, it returns into the flesh and causes abscess and rot there, and bad illness;
Therefore, for that reason, it is necessary to treat it carefully and little by little until the head, and nothing remains on the body;
And sometimes this vein, when it is treated of five palms in length, or ten, and a certain man came to me, to whom it issued from 10 palms in length, and when you cut it, it shoots out 1 ray or pierces, and it pierces to the bottom
so that all in it issues; and be empty the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicine preventing corruption any day, then cure it like the abscesses.
And at no time to this vein hands veins, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot, and there comes out much blood, and from which it jumps veins; cure it then as we have said before.
Of worms which are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens often to oxen,
and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the going of limb to limb, as long as they will pierce the skin where it goes, and leap forth;
and it is caused by rot of some humors, such as coming toward and serpents and worms and parasites in the belly.
and doubt is cast upon its evilness, for when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and milked, if one can flee only when it goes:
So then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong band tightly.
Then cut above and apply the salve, and if the arrow is stuck in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dries up.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it can damage the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold under it its eyebrow, then cut above, and treat the wound.
and it is necessary to use for the patient purification of the body of medicines solutes for the corrupt humors
and if it gets worse from meats causing corruption.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This sickness is called in our land "vakir", and is a pain that comes in some members and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was summoned to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and a little while after, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, Sooner than anything, like living silver when it is cut from its place.
The pain departs from that place and goes to the shoulder.
And then a little while after it corrodes throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm.
Then she told me that it returned again around her body, as I saw her.
I was much amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never seen this illness in this manner. However, I had seen many who well felt pain when moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this, as I saw in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and for this reason appears that constraint of windiness;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist bodies and veins full.
And when you see to cure this malady, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lump above and below lies evenly, and then cut upwards until that constraint of windiness is freed. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the care of those who expel wind, such as bitter pills, and rue pills, and similar ones.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and haired, and smooth. And of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those that have parts. And those that fall in any limb, they fall in two ways: or in the principal member it falls,
such as brain, heart, liver,  kidneys, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you after, appear to you: If it is necessary that you make haste with the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many cases. And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the skull which is on top of the brain, This is when there are scotomies and sores and ulcers and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of phlegm. And perhaps this happens without pain from the nose or ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice. And a discharge of white moisture, resembling pus, leaps out from the wound, and it also jumps out like burning charcoal;
And if this sign appears to you, then hold off from the cure, and treat the arrow wound if it isn't already.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were plugged in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves like the arm, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Then know without doubt that death is coming.
And the sign of the seventh that does not move its lower part is that without plain foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns color, and sighs loudly and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is beside the small ribs; and throws great pain and great grief and sigh; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it jumps out of the wound something of undigested meat.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it jumps out a bit of straw through the intestine, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out and it flows, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the shoulder and the spine of the back and the leg and the hip and the legs, and the members seeming, are safe according to more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason you do it otherwise.
It happened to one man with an arrow in the root of the nose: I grasped it, and pulled it out from another side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without any trouble.
And treat with a sling an arrow that fell in the fat of the eye below the skin. and the arrow was propped up, and I could only reach the point toward the shaft. and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, all 1 and light with no feathers; the wound was clean, and he suffered no ill accidents.
And treat an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers:
I was the barbs, and skillfully as I led it, and was healed the Christians.
And drew an arrow from a man, that he had in his belly, and thought he would die;
and then when it had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I wove it, and drew it out forcefully, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow fell or on his back, and the wound was healed above.
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural disposition, nor finds inconvenience in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell in his face, and the wound was healed;
and remain thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in one of the king's men, which was lodged in his midst-leg. and was a little leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded
I was called to treat it after three days had passed. I found the wound very narrow.
I felt it with a whole subtle tent, and did not feel it at all; And he felt a pricking and pain below his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on its place an atraumatic and digestive plaster, because the spot didn't swell. and appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
and appeared to me the wound of the arrow. I put the plaster on top just then and closed the wound directly, and the patient remained so for a long time.
until he felt the arrow inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a medicine of corroding aqua regia for just then until it was open
and touch it, and feel the head of the arrow which is hardening in its place; then adjust it in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it passed well the ends for .iiij. months,
and then I enlarged the wound so that I put forceps in it on both sides, and it could not issue out;
therefore do not cease to subtly invent and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day some well-made pliers according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it, and restored the wound
And the masters judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was joined, and the patient was healed completely.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those that I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account.
but the wise masters compare well to a very small thing, and on those that are present and lacking, find new works, and nine instruments, at the descent of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not drawn from members where they are fixed otherwise than in .ij. ways: or by the place where they enter, or by another side;
And that which is drawn out by the place where it enters is an arrow which has entered into flesh, and should not be drawn out at any time now.
And if it is not drawn out now, let it remain until the flesh is healed around it, and the exit be cleansed.
and also if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot move out, leave it so for some days, and change the dressing each day;
and then if it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, pierce around it entirely i.e., forest subtly, until the surrounding tissues are enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is placed back in its place in the body, if it cannot be seen, then look for it throughout the whole tent. And if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;
And if you cannot because of the width of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, then cut it as far as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow that it holds with.
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow that it holds with. if you remove the bone which is fastened with two parts to the mouth as much as you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out; and skillfully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot at once, lay it thus until the place around it is softened, then treat it, for extraction is painful. And if the flow of blood makes you contrary, administer what we have said about its treatment in our chapter.
And guard yourself from cutting the nerve and the vein, and put everything you can to withdraw the arrow without danger.
Whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form in which he was when the arrow struck him. for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or if one sees or feels anything in the skin where it is inflamed.
Cut therefore there, as long as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it; if it jumps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot be pulled out, let her remain there still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
And if the arrow shaft is in it, remove it completely from the shaft;
And if the shaft has fallen and you see administering a removal is necessary, then administer one instrument that has been heated; so that the point of the arrow goes into the head of the instrument; and then it is removed.
And if the arrow is stuck, put one instrument with a pointed tip inside it to help with the extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded by tissue, then you should cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as it is fitting.
And if the arrow falls in the thigh or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to vital organs, and you can cut into it, then make a cut.
and guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if need be. and cure it until it is healed.
The shape of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to an eye's beak, and see here the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the common veins of the body Of veins from which one heals are thirty-one, of which there are sixteen at the head.
That is to say: two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the "two herbaches"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein that is taken from the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose. and the two veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins of which one commonly heals are 5 in each arm:
one is the cephalic, and is on the inside of the left chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fast," and is composed of the cephalic and basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right chest and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is on the bone, and it is the one from which we bleed, which opens clearly on the pouch.
And the safeneous vein is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two veins;
and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one of these is below the curve of the pouch of the left side, and the second saphenous vein which is in the right ankle; and the vein which is called "ness," that is in the ankle of the other side.
And in the other leg are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs, and migraine; and the quality of the vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck to a board. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two lengths depending on the head: and where you feel the pulse below your back, there take it;
then take the lancet, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards, And cauterize the skin and vein well two fingers thick, and make blood flow as much as you see.
then restrain and bind it until it is healed.
and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, it is good for an old migraine, And sudden, and accustomed ophthalmia, and to the body of sharp tears at the eyes;
And the qualities of the blood are so like I say: And that the patient strains his neck, until the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulses below his throat, and then he inhales.
then gently lift the vein above with your index finger, and put the lancet under. and lift the vein up and cut it, just as you have done with two other veins, and make a cut of blood according to your need;
then untie the patient, and put your hand over the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top;
and then bind it up tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of this before and of their cutting and extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the bloodletting of the cephalic for diseases of the face old, and to migraine, and to redness.
and the qualities of it is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fessor", whose shape is here:
And place the point on the vein, and hold firmly with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never use a wide flame again.
However, it is not fitting for the flames to be too large; and heal across, because the bone is near, and by chance, it breaks the flames when they are subtle.
The draining of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and to the cheekbone, and to the cheek, and to the corner of the eye, and to diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their draining is that the patient strains his neck by twisting with some linen, as before;
then the bone, and it is the vein through, a piece of the long of the flame a piece wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flame is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have need, and then tie on cloth, and tie it well.
The vein of the nose is good for wateriness, and for feverish sickness, and for diseases of face. as for migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old.
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then presses his chin to your left hand and take the subtle long flame, and put it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well when, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not allow it to bleed too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, for it is very quickly restored;
The sap of the two trees helps in the treatment of inflammation, and in the beginning of scabies, and many diseases, and epilepsy, and corrosions, and herpetic lesions, and boils;
and the qualities of the sap are that the patient extracts his neck below both, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat,
Then cleanse the vein with a long point widely, then draw blood temperately, as much as is needed.
Then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the linen, and restrain and tie up both veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and let him leave it until morning, so that the wound is cleansed.
Of cleansing of the livers The blood of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and sores and tumors.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and you recognize them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: Therefore, treat both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
Therefore, treat both of them, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, if treat the larger of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The vein below the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the vein are that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side a black vein:
therefore one and the other, and do not prick too much, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly bled are bled in two ways:
either by pricking them with one single flame of about an inch wide, or olive tree subtle as you see trenches cut, and is called "anesis"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and closeness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is much renowned, and is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the veins that are covered with blood plains of gross blood apparent, and that contain gross blood and troubled; and this is the form of the olive flame:
and is more subtly pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where it has subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer to heal skillfully, and that he warns himself of the artery which is below. And if he severs the artery, and a torrent of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and the flame must not pierce but cut like a knife.
And if the basilica does not clearly open, then it is necessary that you restrain it and change another; or you want no vein of it, or you make in its place a vein in the arm; it clearly opens; and the cautery with the knife as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the sinew, then it is fitting so that you extract the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse. then mark the place with a mark, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame anesil;
and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is of the artery: therefore avoid it.
And if you see it rise up high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and put your thigh upon length, then take off your thigh if it without ache, which many times happens.
bind his arm, and leave so, and do not move it the patient; and be upon fear, and do not move it until it is sound.
And if the limb is not aching, and it feels warm, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and ache the limb.
And take a rind of fig, and make it flat, and take one half and tie above well until the other day;
if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
and the stopping of the bleeding is not grieved in more positions for the small size of the wound, and the strength of the brachial ligament
The vein's blood in the middle helps so that it treats blood from above the head and from below the body, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the physician to feel along for the nerve that is below, and if it is not too much embedded, and he finds the nerve, and he inflates and the saint[s] be grieved, and perhaps cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you feel it with the instrument anesthetic; and escape the nerve to your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make it long.
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes.
And it is necessary to vein by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not have a nerve or artery.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest spot, and do not worry if you miss the first time, and start again. And by chance, it swells in some people when it is missed the first time, but it does not matter. The quality of the blood is according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about bloodletting, it is administered only to preserve health,
and to ward off future illnesses; and be the bloodletting done in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; And one must bleed at the beginning of prayers at noon, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears.
And one must bleed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
The bleeding that is administered to illnesses has no set time, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in all times;
And it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed old men who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema. if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not draw out the superfluous impurities harmful to the principal members.
Do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they remain so, nor the dropsy.
and if one falls ill after colic, and vomiting, and abdominal pain, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, and vigil, and fasting, and all that virtue, or by something from the weapon or from the body;
then subtilize the humors, if it is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have their power;
then enter into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to subtilize the blood.
and heal of the vein of the piss near the third, as we have said;
and guard yourself on that day of work, and of pain, and of lust, and of similar things;
and be lying and joyful, and let the right hand be higher than the one that is healing, and rub the arm two or three times,
then pull the linen upward evenly, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal properly;
and then rub the area with your hands, until the veins swell and are felt;
then moisten the vein with a bit of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand upon that vein beneath its place a little where he wants to bleed. so that the vein does not flee and fail to be cut with iron. For there are veins that flee as if ropes when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness. so that when one puts upon the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
and if it opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, for this reason it behooves the surgeons to be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened the first time, it is good; if not, it begins again a little below where it was or above carefully, if the leg is not swollen.
And if the leg is swollen, and the patient is afraid, then he leaves it for one or two days, and does not bind the arm: for perhaps a boil will come; nor does he enter water, then it begins again the bleeding if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small, or the vein is short and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then fire that same opening directly into the whole flame;
and work a point carefully, so that the eyes are inflated; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflated, do not begin the bleeding again, and put on a dab of oil, because it soothes the body from blood, and is mixed in this place the oil that the eye;
and thus administer the oil in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing happens to the triangle and the bow of it, when it is placed back in its place; so subtle the sinews and they separate when it is too large.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is not drained except at the time where the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten, and place on it a sponge soaked in water and a little hot, and restrain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the bloodletting from the vein, and if it stays in place after some days without any blackness or greening, then it will not harm him; and if you see, put on no thing of aloes or myrrh, remission in juice of calamus, monster, or seeming.
And many times abscesses and appearance happen at the saint of the basilica: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the compression of the hand, so is that appearance bad. Therefore eschew that you put on nothing of those things we have said, for perchance it comes short without the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the place, then the cure of another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each wound with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it issue until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is fine; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it is necessary for one who is weak and ill, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide;
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little, and often; and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive loss of blood and cutting of nerves, and is more useful than bleeding from the long or wide vein.
And to one whose body needs the bloodletting, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if it is dried out, treat with blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, moisten bread before the bloodletting with syrup of figs, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-smelling syrup.
And if he faints during the bloodletting, after the flow of blood, it is fitting that he inhale broth of meat and a subtle fragrant syrup.
and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the opening of veins.
And if he wants to bleed his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his virtue continuously.
And whoever wants to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed from another place, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has a lot of blood within the body that is already exhausted, and causes fever; so it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the puncture until it flows in streams. since you treat all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his pulses when he is healthy, that death may not come in place of a pulse, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent.
and it is not fitting when you see a man's arm untied, and draw blood the second time, and the puncture is closed, that you press forcefully upon it; nor if it is curved, let him extend his arm completely, for this would be bad.
but let him leave it until it heals the second time; or you prick it at the tip of the flame, as long as the sinew that is frozen has parted from the vein's opening and put on top i.p.oc of soil renewed in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not bind it at all, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity exists to draw blood a second time, let it be healed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein from which blood is taken from the arm is in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of the bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red.
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, not through the wide nor the long.
and let the opening be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if without being able to draw it, then put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand in hot water, because one puts it in winter more than in summer;
and the vein of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there are neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the Savior's vein of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and here's how:
stretch out the hand and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; and if it is broken crookedly, and if you cut it all the way through, it does not matter.
and do not remove too much flesh, because the nerves are under all skin,
and then put the hand in hot water, if it has stiffened in the wound, and cannot be moved.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on the vein to close it firmly, and do this for each vein.
The blood of them in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you towards the right.
The blood of the sofen is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and hips and legs old, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its blood are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and bind above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
So then take the larger vein, or at the ankle, which is most suitable.
And if you cut it on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below, and cut it across like when cutting; and let the flames be as thin as a thread.
And if he cannot issue blood from it, put the foot in water, and let the vein empty well.
And if the first incision is made by the patient, begin the second one above a bit, because the skin is salty. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and in this way do the same with the socket of the other foot equally.
The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle's spur, and its incision brings relief to the hip pain when it is hot blood.
And the qualities of its incision are that the patient sits or bathes and stretches above the ankle 4 fingers in twisting,
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across. and it is better that you cut it, for the vein is dry, and it is well joined by hand men.
and it is better that you cut it, for the vein is dry, and it is well joined by hand men. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens or near the heel of the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard the nerves;
and make as much bloodletting as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed.
Of the sucking wounds
Sucking blisters are made of horns, or reed, or glass; and the suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction that is without pricking is done in two ways: either it is with all heat, or without heat.
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction at the two shoulders; and the suction above the hips; and the suctions in the two arms; and the suctions on the two legs; and the suction cups to the two ankles; and suction does not treat blood, but of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh
and for this reason it does not weaken one as much, as is done with bleeding from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it must be suctioned, or by custom, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at any time;
because there are some who, when they have need to breathe, have a heavy head;
and there are some who  feel fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are those who dream, and see by blood,  and corpses and death, and similar things.
And when we saw these signs, and even when it was removed the month, we commanded to blow after .iij. hours of the day.
The blood of the vein helps to the great pain of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it does not happen that it is after the evacuation of all the body;
and this blowing (vent) is in place of the vein of the cephalic.
and it does not happen that those who are of cold complexion use it, or who have catarrh, because this causes them great discomfort;
and for this reason it is not proper that old men use it, nor those who have or cold fevers.
And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of oblivion.
The cupping on the neck is in place of the vein of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for treating the pain. and for the opening of the channel of the groin, and all, and for swelling;
And there it is necessary to put cautiously, because if it holds too firmly, it engenders obstruction or stomach and or heart.
The evacuations of the two ribs of the neck are worth for the pains of the head and headache and migraine, and for strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and you must command the practitioner that he expresses his hand when putting it, that he does not cut the artery, and does not come hemorrhages of blood.
The evacuations below the chin are worth for mouth diseases, and for gum rot, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins in the arm. Because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient to not hit them too hard because their skin is bare and it exposes nerves and arteries.
The suction cup which is on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it behoves that the suction cup be large, and be of metal, that it has need to well draw; and perchance, if it were subtle, it would break; and there I make great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs are well-suited for drawing blood from the whole body, and they help with old pains in the reins, the hips, and the bladder, and they loosen up the flowers; and they are in place of the two shins, and the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed moderately, and place it carefully, and move evenly, and do not cease doing so until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the blood's color; then firm, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tough flesh, and clear pores: therefore it behooves to strike only once, and it behoves to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, it behoves to strike twice: the first time to soften the path of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it behoves to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw blood little by little, we prick only once.
And if we wish much blood, we begin again often; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it deep, and the end is that the cords be pierced soundly.
And it behoves him who has thick and hard skin, and who has many pores, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with oil appetizer and dissolving. if it is in this state, from oil of violets, or sweet almond oil, or oil of gourd seed;
and if it is in summer, from watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one whom one heals has tender skin and large pores, then one should not put any oil at all
but it is necessary to wash after the inflation of rose water, or cold water, or water from elderberry, or water from pumpkin, or water from porcelain, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, let him rise from ease with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities, they rise from ease with old wine, or water of saffron, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not necessary at all to cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
and it is necessary that he lie down when he ought to be winded and when he is winded. And guard those who are well are choleric, and if their skin is too thick and inflamed; then it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce at the hip, and similar things;
and minced quince, and venison, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and cumin seed, and  cumin seeds and small onions and pigeons;
And on the day that he feels better, he must drink more than eat;
And it is proper to give no one at any time  garlic or nutmeg before or after the cupping, in order to comfort the principal limbs; And be subtle with the wine, but it is not proper that those who are hot should drink it.
The suction cups that are put on without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the mouse, and gout, and on the belly and the groin and the hips and the hip joint, because these members do not suffer well being hurt on their eyes.
and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb as we put on the breasts when the milk flows; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and groin to reduce the member;
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one places it upon the liver and upon the mouse when there is wind retention.
and these suction cups are administered empty to suck alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a manner one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water to which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And have two fingers wide and half palm long, and have or cost at the middle one small hole, as for putting a needle
and let it be of iron, soft in front so that it does not bite the patient when placing it on the limb;
and have in the middle a bar of iron or steel, to put a candle inside;
and be both large and small according to the diseases and the people who take them;
because the suction cups of children are different from old people, and the thin ones from the fat ones.
And should one put this suction cup onto this limb:
Embracing the candle of wax or  one linen, and put it within the suction cup across from the rod which is within the suction cup, so that the brightness be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it over the limb, and you must do so over the opening that we have said, so that when one wishes, steam goes into it, and one removes the suction cup;
and apply the poultice as before, and renew it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup which is administered in disease of pleurisy, on all acute things, it has no rod or opening, and it is administered only when it is full of water, and is put on the limb just as much;
and this is the shape:
Suctions are not brought forth except to limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and in their naked flesh, such as arms or legs, and other similar parts;
And the qualities of the user are that when you find suctions that are in clear, sweet waters without dirt, take them.
and place them one by one in fresh water until they are tame, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be cleansed of vein and leeching, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultice;
and when they will be flat and shrink, if it is their place where one can put a leech, put it, because it does good afterward.
If not, raise the place with ease, and then water, very well, and then sprain it.
and if the place heals too much after the poultice, moisten one cloth of linen in cold water and put it on, until the poultice is extended;
and if the wound is multiplied, put upon it powdered vitriol, or salt, and similar things, until it is stretched;
or you put on the spot half of peeled beans, and let them there until they dry in place, now it will stop;
and if you need more, take other beans.
And if the beans will not be taken, rub the place with fresh blood, or you put a needle in there until the wound oozes. and then put them above, and as soon as they feel the blood, they become inflamed;
and when you see that they are bleeding, put powder on a pinch of aloes and salt ground together, or ash, they will stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear friend, that the fool will look in this chapter as if he has never seen any of the old books, nor read a letter from them.
and for this reason, the science is held in contempt in our land, because I have never found any good one.
and I know nothing of it, except through the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science from them, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if anything does not help him, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age.
or if his strength is not very hot, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say, cold meats, and beef and mutton, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overfill yourself with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb; so that the patient returns to his former government that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one feed the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or which have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and peas, and testes, and tripe, and stomach of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment it recovers strength and the fracture heals more quickly.
And know that bones broken in the old and decrepit cannot be as well rejoined or healed according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, large knobs which are set and join the limb together, until it is as strong as before; and do not touch any part of its work, and for this reason it is necessary to feed him with thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go straight through and others that are jagged, like the point of a quill pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go straight through and others that are jagged, like the point of a quill pen for writing. And if with a fracture, and a fracture to a tiny split.
And in every manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes to him in its place;
And is known the fracture of the bone by those that the bone is twisted, and opens well by outward, and feels to the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no torsion nor feeling to touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
but it can have curvature, or fissure, or small fracture. If it is not advisable that you move it by hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it gently.
And know that the fracture that goes in arc, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together evenly, so that abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come there, then let them alone for any day until the abscesses are calmed; Then place it equally in the way that you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of him who has pieces; then restrain it, as it is proper here after.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is of two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it is small members, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand.
And place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are disengaged, you carefully realign all the pieces in their places as much as you can, and guard that through your work no harm or pain comes to the patient.
And adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And it feels well by the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then straighten it beautifully, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who do it through their work abscess hot and contraction of the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in place, so admonish the sick person well that he does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; And guard well that the member be so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, it is not at all, and it befits him to put in such a disposition that he does not feel any pain.
For when he feels no pain, it is not at all, and it befits him to put in such a disposition that he does not feel any pain. and keep that it is set straight, that crookedness does not come when it is restored;
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that the broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths;
And those that are large, such as hips and legs: so it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard linen cloth, because the wide linens embrace the entire large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap;
Then bind around light bandages, 3 or 4 turns according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little on all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, that the fracture then distances from the fracture;
And soften the linen a little by little, until you reach most of the sound part, then take another linen and turn around directly above the broken part;
then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first place above.
then put between the splints of linen or cloth, until it is all even, then bind everything above with bandages, and then put your well-made pads on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, put on top something soothing for the abscess and which removes the swelling, and let it remain so for some days.
Then restrain with your pads, and let them be half the width of a sage cane carefully chosen, or from wood that is used to make the cleats, or from palm strips, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint which one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it is necessary to the limb of small or great size;
then bind on the splints just as you did at the first time, then tie them above with a thread evenly, just as in the first time on the fracture;
more tight it is above, less below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
car if the threads are thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their ropes of flax linen twisted, and this is a great error, for the rope cannot be even if it is too fine, and it is not right that there be between each star less than two fingers' width.
And if the patient is distressed by the heads of the stars after the tightening in their healthy ones, then put beneath them compresses of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with the crushing, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here afterward.
And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to set it immediately because after five or seven days, or more according to the surety of a boil coming hot;
and see here the manner of the ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that stays on the walls of the mill, and bind it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, not too thin nor too thick, and in use, and it is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, and even to women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three ounces of  barberry, lead oxide, and asafetida and gum arabic, ana 10 grains each; myrrh and aloes, ana 5 grains each; alechil (probably a typo for "aethiopica" or another resin), 8 grains; and make it into powder, and mix it with an abundance of egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and it benefits many men.
Another manner of emplasters that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana 10; myrrh and aloes, ana 8;  acacia 6; Armenian bole 10, and grind well, and confit with water or egg white, and administer.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and it soothes the pain that comes, and the use of the bone, and the bruise: take new wool, and soak it in oil and cooked lard, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore anything, but it is good to soothe a hot abscess, and properly removes the pains.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of the broken bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of veices, of each one part; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is feverish, boil it with coriander water moist, or water, and use it.
Another manner of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balm, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part; and grind, and boil with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ipocras says in his book that on the broken limb to restore it one should put a certain made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it is between two not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen that one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and warm a little, like myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and heads of sheep decocted, or feathers of owl, and wormwood, and seal equally, and grind them up, and make a plaster of it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor have the bones moved from their place; if so, do not loosen it for many days
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling no rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take light cloth, and a sponge of sea moistened, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the limb rest an hour, then put on dry linen, half in water or rose oil, and tie over a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess;
and rest the inflammation of the limb, and be removed the pain, then recommence the fine dressing, and a bit of ointment, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need ointment and linen, then recommence it, as you did at first equally.
And if it doesn't come to the member nothing of what we have said, then do not unbind it until after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7; and never leave it for 20 days, according to what you see, as long as the breakage heals, and approaches the fitting of the flesh together;
Therefore, restrain it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I have said earlier; and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that there cannot come nourishment. Therefore, arise the hot water bath, every time you undo it, and wash a little with the sponge.
Therefore, by this work the nourishment to the limb is cut off and  it mends hastily those who do foolish things, who leave the limb twisted: it is bad, and such works are dangerous, and I see nothing else than to leave it and operate directly.
Of various ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are, and diverse figures, and the causes are destined;
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone all the bone until the place which is below the bone, such as is made haiche or staff; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called “haichure”.
Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called “absolute”; and the wound of these two fractures is great or small.
And if there is a blow embedded, or splitting or of the collarbone from stone, or of the head on stone, or similar things.
And if it has a break that reaches up to the skin which is under the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound which is placed in the bone as subtle as a hair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary".
And if the wound which is made by striking with stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the piece of bone enter inwards, and it is so hot like a blacksmith when he works on the cauldrons; so does the stone enter within.
And this happens more to those who have soft bones, such as children's heads;
and there are to all these manners of fracture that small pieces are dislodged as stars; and I shall speak of it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquiry at the ends, and by the corrupt flesh which is above.
The appearance of capillary is known by those who when they have uncovered the bone and rub above it, see the fracture black.
In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no evil accident, such as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, extension, numbness, and ague fever, and eyes becoming inflamed and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unavoidable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the fractured bone comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh under the bone does not rot, and comes the accident that we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes right up to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the split part thus: and is that you prick the head of the injured man, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and upon the figure of the wound more carefully than you can.
and if the bleeding comes to the uncovering of bone, or abscess chapped, then help him with what is necessary, and that you fill its place with soft dressings in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the chapped abscess is appeased, and be sure of the bleeding; then begin to start removing the bone, and it is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut in a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then you put another incision larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of iron needle, and in work lightly, so that you do not bleed the head.
And if the bone is hard and stubborn, it is necessary that you pierce it around it, so that you administer splints with drills, not too deeply that they penetrate beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you may have drills for all tests; and this is the form of the three types of drills:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one drill on the bone, and turn at your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill elsewhere a little after, and so do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like tongs, pincers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the marrow.
And when you will have the bone pierced, and treated, it is necessary that you remove the piece which is remained from the bone with every other instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more pointed and more subtle than the other incisor.
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, or no scales, then lightly remove the bones with i.e. instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is this one which Galien states, which is drier; and it praises a lot, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears to open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lens-shaped incisor, for this is its shape:
And do not cut in one part, and it is the sharp side on 2 coasts, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is tight against the bone, then gently pull the bone, because one pulls it well with feeling, and without fear.
And if the broken bone does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to put that asperity back together, and remove the scales with a subtle razor, which you must have various quantities of, in order to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and figure of the fracture.
If you start with larger razors, and after with more subtle ones, and do not cease doing this until it is well.
In each of the other capillary and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer cause according to its placement; and this is something that is not replied to by someone who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is open, it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you don't wound the wound, then administer by above one other linen, and do not restrain it more than until it holds the wound alone.
And let it be so one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then undo it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of cumin, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer additional medicines mundane without biting.
And guard that the wound be well clean, that you leave there not even ointment, nor let any flesh come together, because when flesh comes together upon the skin of the brain, it will corrupt and fester, and bring great harm to the patient; for when one puts a thing which bites upon it, it will bite back.
Therefore take guard, if no evil accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so it is doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing worse comes from than the medicine we have put upon it, that it has virtue, then you must take a part of honey and 3 parts of rose oil and glue one drapel, and put it upon the place; then the cure of manners of cures as is necessary until it is healed.
Know that at no time are the two parts of the one above broken, or the one by itself, because they are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you place your small finger or point of the hand into the opening of the bone, and put each fracture inside your index finger, and with the palm outward, until the bone returns to its natural form; and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain by your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the neck and cannot come to its place, then it behooves you to put it even at the head of a rail a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another such one, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can;
If this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed, then bind at the head of the neck ten sheets of linen if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one on the other side if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
And said any restorer that one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in the confection of aubun of an egg, and powder of mill; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one puts in their place feathers of goose instead of tents, and so to i. souffle draped around, and it holds the blister, and blows the patient among; do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the new while as you work on it, put  cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in i. poc of diachylon.
And if an abscess is not there, apply a plaster from outside, of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light bandages on top, and bind it neither too tight nor too loose;
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then remove them with suitable instruments, then stitch up the wound, and treat with things such as flesh grafts and suturing, and plasters and ointments as are appropriate for this.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with tents and put pieces of wool in it, until it is healed.
of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is broken apart, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only so slightly, and is not broken in two, except that it is splintered inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and push the fracture inside lightly, and the one made by the other hand outside, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if the movement of teeth happens, or a break, then tie them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place above the broken jaw properly, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a large star well made, or a piece of skin equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above as much as you can, and command the patient that he rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and put plaster above, of the powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after what you have removed the cerote; and put on top the light bandage, and if the plasters adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if a boil comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone is taken away; so subtly from the removal with instruments suitable to that.
And if the wound is narrow, then widen it by flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then cover the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable to that, to prevent flesh from growing, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks more times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the works are like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the arm that feels the broken bone; and the other extends his neck towards the side; then put each fracture to your hands, so that the form be as it should, and there is no appearance nor bump.
And if you need to extend more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your necessity; and being and light the arm, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you put each fracture as it should.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder by strength because it comes in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie always on his back and put under the shoulder one or two hand-spans, and put the ministers the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split it up; and draw together the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, then cut one of the incisors that you have; but put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the shaft.
And it seems like a spoon, and is not completely hollowed out, and be as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the possibility of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and one be wide, and the other is narrow, as is the path of the wound that you have made when treating the bones.
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then cover the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and place it on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incisions, is that you put on the bone a plaster of mill powder and egg yolk, and place light bandages on top, and put a spear under the armpit, if you have need for it; then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put one double cloth on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a fine strip three spans wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged one so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and lower the healthy shoulder, and lower the injured shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps i. small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the head higher; thus will lighten the fracture of the shoulder by the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind his arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until xx days;
then restart the plaster, if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and let him be so, until he is restored; and it is restored in at most xxviii days, and in less time for some men.
of the breakage of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or its large place is not in the middle, and it is only felt by touch; so the apparatus according to the figure of the fracture, and resets it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on top of the place powder of the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on i drapeil double; then put on a splint wide and subtle, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is rough in any place of the shoulder, so employ that roughness of linen bandages, so that the splint rests evenly; and then restrain it with a very tight bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the joint each day; and every time that it softens, so restrain it, and put back the splint if it is out of place, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25, And when this number is accomplished, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that is put out easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes beforehand, and is not under the skin, so do as follows, and on the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to appease abscess hot.
Of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it bows towards the lower part, and the patient feels great pain, and weakness, and thirst, and perhaps vomits blood, and the bones are open in the broken bone, and it feels well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one puts one cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulder blades, and assembles the sides of the two bones with your hands, and subtly puts each in all manners as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put plasters and bandages over the thin layer of salt, or other light stuff, and envelop it in one sheet, and lay it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around on the back, and strain it firmly, and every hour check the bandaging, and if it loosens, tighten it again; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten then, and untie it, and cleanse what has come there with methods of care; then re-apply the bandage, and strain it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are smooth; and one feels it well upon examination of the sides.
And the restoration is that you put each fracture in its place, as it should be. And then put the plaster on it, and restrain it with a splint if you need one.
And if the breaking of the ribs is leaning inwards, the patient feels very great pain and stabbing, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and besides pains, and coughing and vomiting great quantities of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put a great deal of effort into it.
And if some say that it is proper to administer foods which swell the belly, in order to expel the colic outward.
We do not do this, except for warm abscesses if they have not yet come. And if they have already come, heal them.
And some of us say that one should place cupping glasses on the area, to suck out fluids forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass draws the superfluities to the spot for the sake of weakness.
And they say any of you should cover the place with a woolen cloth in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the inner flesh, then be cured of the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that points the cloth, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to split on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under one instrument to ward off the syfac; and then one must trench the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put on soft cloths in rose oil, and put them on top; and cure while the place of this that it is convenient to abscess, and be lying calmly on the ribs where it should, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a bone in the neck breaks, and it sometimes happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care on him.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on his back there is windiness and involuntary ejection; and when one supports him on his belly, he has involuntary ejection. And when he is supported on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortally wounded: if he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to them, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you warm it if there is an abscess, so put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is calmed; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as it is healed. And if any bones are dislocated, then it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then treat it with ointment to encourage healing until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", then put your bag from your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand in your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do this, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, if it did not have been a little weakening at the top; and making long, and declining to the side, and coming to the patient pain in the place, and prickling, and swelling of what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are on the break; and know which is the break and the shape of it; and if the break is at the top only, then place equal the break, as long as it is in a natural figure.
And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that break is apparent to you. And when you have placed it even, put it on the plate, then put a beam of wood or of heart on it, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move; and employ the place under the ribs until the fracture is even.
And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes to this place, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulder is that which is between the collar and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick plain of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends of the stick with two cords, and bend them upward, and place the patient on one seat; then lay the broken arm above the stick, until it reaches the armpit, and make a curve in the middle of the stick, then put under a heavy thing or have the minister extend it downward; then put the hands together so that the broken bone returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties the hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all one link, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more apart, then bind, I say, one linen below the fracture, and on top of the fracture, and extend each minister to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one linen in the middle below the seat, and one other towards the back, below the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the back, then it is necessary to put one linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on top and on the side; then set the fracture equal, as it should be, and bind it, unless a puss comes.
And if a puss comes, then do not bind it again until seven days, and put on linen moistened in vinegar and rose oil, until the puss is appeased; then bind it, and the manner of binding it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the helper, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape over, and bind on the helper and on the arm so that the arm is in its place as much as possible, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is moved, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three fingers on each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less away from the bone.
And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess hot, so let it tie until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the bandage, that itch or swelling does not come to the place, or the soreness cannot come to the limb for that it is too straight. If it succeeds, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come to it, so do not untie it for after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the bonds; if it succeeds by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat as we have before set, in such manner that the meat is at first thin; and when it begins to recover, so let it be thick. And it is custom that the shoulder and leg ought to be taken back within forty days of the whole; and then one must untie it and administer baths and medicines of ointments for the place to heal. And if the stricture is bad and clogged, so remain untied for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fosciles», because one is small, and that is the one that follows the armpit; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little toe; perhaps break the large foscile alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grieves than when they are broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken alone, then it is necessary to gently stretch it, and put it straight.
And if it is the large foscile, then it is necessary to pull more strongly; and extend it on one cushion, and hold the armpit of the hand higher than the other, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient cross on himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers' arms to the part below his hand, or at one length, and others ministers to one other above. And then put the pieces straight, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture the pieces are broken, put each one in its place, and if there is any separated that catches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as above with the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, glue it, that is, a cloth bandage made of rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the bandage on top carefully, until the abscesses are calmed. Then remove the wax, and put the plaster of the powder of the mill with an abundance of egg, then put the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more in place, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and restrain more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less distancing, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is strained, be of linen, neither too thick nor too fine, as we have said. And reward the member and the ligature after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water, until the itching is appeased; and leave the limb not too tight to rest. And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if taking care that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave so for some days, until the numbing corrects itself, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unbind him until 20 days, or whenever it is evident that he can put his hands to his neck, and that his neck be even; and beware of movement and excitement, and sleep on his back; and know that this sprain is restored in 30 days, or 35, and perhaps in 20, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
Of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and among us there are few fractures, and it comes but many times to a sprain
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behoves the patient to lie crossed, and to be straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the minister the broken bones, and put them equal the measures, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and the bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one drape of linen.
And if the fracture is at the base towards the belly of the palm, then make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; and then strain with a long cloth, and let the splint be of heart soft as big as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it behoves.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it behooves you to put a splint above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it tightly around the hand, and staunch the linen between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two, if it is the arm, set it straight as it behooves; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and let it not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that is after; or you bind them all together in one, as much as is best, or you put above a splint, such as a poultice; and take heed to the restoration and disposition of the hot, dry abscess, and cure what comes from it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is done in two ways: one above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his limb to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is driven into the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one limb should be pulled towards the knee, and the other limb below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, and then one limb should be near the knee, and the other extension down; then put your hands on the bone equally, until it is according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the bandage, if an abscess does not come.
And if there is an abscess hot, let it cool then return to your work and your care; the ligature is made in this manner. It is necessary that you encase on the fracture .i.e., bandage hard doubled in .ij. or .iij., and remove superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put .i. long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread go up; then turn up the leg and up the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then use the space between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal pressure, then begin to tie in the form .iij. or iiij. above the fracture; and as you go higher above the fracture, the less you strain; then take the .ij. heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and bind .iij. splints that are above, then return down to the end of the thread, until you come near the foot; and strain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, so that there comes no abscess or swelling nor any other sign.
And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes up, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to set them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and draw pus out; and cure it as we have said, until it is healthy.
And sometimes the hip is broken like this, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration thus made, it does not harm the patient.
And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the knee joint
Know that in the knee joint there are few fractures, but it often bends. And if it breaks, it is not more than a fissure or one split, and it has both a wound, and no wound, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is this: one sets equal what is round to its parts, as long as it can be assembled and moved; then put the plaster, and in it put a round splint, if you have need of it, and hold it as necessary, then review all the dispositions that we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar things; so put on each accident what is right for it, as long as it be healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz," and the other "foscile"; and all kinds of fractures come as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns downwards. Therefore, administer extension, and set it straight, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it behooves that if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two fasces of chestnut wood that support the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap in two lengths one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this binding point the leg will not be able to incline to the right or to the left, and thus it is well; and none administers one stick along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and it is placed on the leg to ward off movement, and properly done is this in a fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so cure it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
To the ankle no fracture comes, but to the bones of the foot there comes sometimes a fracture and to two parts, and there have been found only a few in more places.
And if there comes a fracture to the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping one another, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, then put your foot upon theirs, where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return into their places; then put the splint and bandages above, and under the belly of the foot a small board to 2 fingers width, then restrain the foot firmly, then when you have enveloped them with cloths and other things as you need.
And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandages, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one poke wider, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it stand upon the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about the other fractures, as soon as we have said; and secure each accident as it is fitting.
of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if she makes her sit enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and be held by behind; then fill the hole of nature with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then take out the woman, and lift her back little by little, and so jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do seven days or around: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of sheep, and tie it to the opening one string, and put all the bladder into nature; then blow into the string form, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is sound.
And when the bone of the finger of man is broken, or of the woman, restore it thus as we have said in the hip bone; and are not hidden these fractures near to him who puts his study and use into them, and understands my book. For the fracture signifies more dispositions to the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
In the member, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it into the member; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it three days or until healed, and it will be sound quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then keep the vitriol restraint, if you have no other thing, then begin again to restore the fracture in the same hour or that day, if a pimple does not come.
And if a pimple comes to it, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the pimple is appeased, and do not touch it in the third or fourth day, for you would make a bad accident happen.
And if the broken bone is appearing above the uncovered heart, then it is necessary that you put it gently in place with your hands, to a small extent.
And if the extension is not available for you to put it in place with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which has .vii. or .viij. points long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the artisan that he impregnates .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and one pock thick, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called 'palainche,' for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be put on the top of the visible bone; and the buttock at one time, so that it returns, and be even against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has hold.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, so cut it with a suitable instrument, either incisor or saw, to your power; then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as it should be in place, then moisten one drape in black stippled wine, and properly if it is in position; and do not put on the wound cerote nor anything else where it has oil, so that it does not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the break; and many times fools have done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corrosion at any time; and be the strainings more soft and more light than those of other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, so it is not fitting to put stars on; but envelop around, instead of stars, hard drapes, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days, an injury at the wound, then remove what you have put on with all wine, and put healing ointment on the wound, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb two times a day, morning and evening, as long as it is joined and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be bandaged in such a manner that the bow pulls gently downwards.
And if on the next day it does not join but returns backwards, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which reason you must cleanse the wound with a sponge and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in this chapter before.  And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bone, and other similar bones of the larger limbs, do not attempt to treat it, for many times death comes from it. Instead let it be; perhaps it will heal by itself after twenty or thirty days. Then treat the wound, if you can; but if you cannot, leave it as it is.
of bristles that come from the swelling
We often come after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance, the member cannot do its natural works.
Take care then if it is fresh: if it has administered medicines styptic, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocol, acacia, and similar others, as you take any of these things, or all together, and make them confit with styptic wine or with yolk of egg or with aysil; and put them on the wound in poultices, and bind them well, and do not untie it for many days; and then untie it, and begin another, until the swelling is removed; or you bind upon a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are that it removes all the swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you return it to any razor, until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
When the broken bone is restored and afterwards the limb remains weak and subtle, this happens for many reasons: one because it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and it could not come to the nourishment of the limb; or for multitude of bruising; or for too much movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make the body supple, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and ease; then put poultices on the limb so that the poultice draws to the great nourishment, and the bruising often of cold water, until the nourishment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
to the limb twisted after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and brings great evils, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the i. plaster softening, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the muslin of vismalve, and you confit it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs grease, and grind them with hay of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And no time is the nodule removed by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands. And be given movement to the limb each hour.
And if the torticollis is ingrained and hardened, like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cover until the bone, with the sharp incisor lightly; and put care and study into the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation comes from any joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is ill-figured, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it is now necessary to bring it back without bracing.
Because if one delays, it swells the limbs, and by chance if one resets it with pain in its place; for this reason it is not necessary to move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if you have bled the patient then let him be, until the abscesses are all calmed; then raise the limb with hot and oil, then reset it gently, and care for each member as it comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to .ij. manners: or they are a bit displaced from their places, and softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva from the mouth that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more disarrangements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it carefully, and do not regret it;
and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and puts his hand with fist into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to put it equal; and command the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fist puts it even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is being reset with pain, even if it is the two jaws together, apply hot water and oil, until they are gently reset; do not hesitate to reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening, put on moistened cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders should be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to yawn, but eat light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are united;
and then gently move it, and do not force him to open his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well joined and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fevers and accustomed boils come, and perhaps a solution of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of clear mucus.
And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many times die those who have it, within eight days.
from the fork
The sprain cannot dislocate from the inside of the rib and from the hip, and it is dislocated no times to the outside, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and stretches his arms; and then presses the place with his palm, and it will return; then put the splint and bandage, and restrain it.
And the head which is towards the armpit cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates once, reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And thus, similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one being when it is dislocated to the part of the seat down; and the second is to the part of the breast; and by chance it is dislocated to the upper part, which happens little;
and it is not dislocated behind for the shoulder, and not inside for the nerves; and many times it is dislocated down towards the seat, especially to those who have little flesh, because in these it is moved easily; in those who have enough flesh, it moves with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And by chance it happens to some men that there is percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore it behoves you to prove it, until you are certain; and then begin the cure.
And it is known when a dislocation occurs when it is pulled down towards the hip, and it makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his body, nor move by any movement.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching.
and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise to bring back when it is new or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person up, then put their hands under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it down; so it will come gently.
And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterwards, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister with a soothing and softening ointment, such as decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then the sick person should be placed on their back, and put under the armpit a piece of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put his heel on the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the sick person.
and other ministers hold the head of the patient so that it does not move down; that shoulder returns all now, and if you see so reset it according to this manner:
and that you make be present one man who is larger than the patient; and be right towards the side, and thrust his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and raise the seat up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so put with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and is one long stick in the ground, whose head be as one pistol, and be neither too thick nor too fine; Then the patient should be placed below, but that he has a sheet on top, and the patient is standing in the long of the staff; then his arm should be extended down on the other side, forming, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one splint of two arms of great and four inches wide, which has the head rounded for the middle to enter under the armpit, according to this form:
Then tie on top of the staff a sheet so that the staff does not hurt the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm on the staff of the long, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one step of a ladder of the wide, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a sphere of wool even, then put the plaster prepared from powdered millet, with incense and auburn of egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the shoulder carefully, and turn the linen upon the plaster, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he bathe softly, as long as the limb is strengthened, because it will heal more quickly; and then bathe again after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is displaced from its place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery to 3 punctures, as it is described in the chapter of cauteries.
And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened; and know that the joint is never fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or rear, it is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and it administers in another place; and cure until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes pain to the limb, and slowness of movement, then the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated to points, and returns to points; and it is dislocated from all sides, even before and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because one sees it well and feels it well; and is dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the injured shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. Because the joint is out of place, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus as an abscess comes from there, because if an abscess came from there, it would be painful to put it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back completely at all, even when it is behind; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and his hands hold against the cutting edge of the knife, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fire of the root of the palm the knife which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that the two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with the two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then that you have surrounded a double long and wide cloth;
and when the mire joins the joint to his hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then put the joint together, until it comes back.
and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with the yolk of an egg, and bind it firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then unbind it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint isn't well set, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it so for some days, until it is firmly set; then unbind it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a fleece of fat sheep, then leave it for 1 day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; And when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bandage back on, and then go into the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healed; and if you see, put on top of it wadding moistened warm with butter, and keep it tight; it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be brought back to its place immediately as soon as it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell or come to have a hot abscess.
And the setting is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he makes the mirror even, so that it puts its palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and the minister puts his hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If this isn't the case, then place poultices of soothing ointments on the abscess, and let him remain so without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in its place after some days, the joint remains twisted.
And it does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is numb, and cannot move anything at all: therefore know that the nerves are severed, or the artery; there is no other remedy except to constrict with fire cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is no other thing.
And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have said, then bind it and leave it for .v. days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the thumbs of the hand
Never are the thumbs of the hand dislocated on one side, never on the back of the palm or on the belly;
therefore are the thumbs, and push the dislocation into your pouches until it comes back, then support the head of the thumb, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for 2 days, and then set it straight on the day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it every day, and make it move, and tie it again. And do this often, until it is tight;
and also do the same, if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do the same, when it is dislocated on the other side.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the limbs jump and move involuntarily, without will, and cannot be held, and many times soften any limb, or both hips or both arms or one.
And many times the leg moves to four parts; that which moves in the rear is called "gilbositez":
The cure for this is that you rewind if the gilbositez comes from childhood; otherwise, there is no cure nor healing of all.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said many ways of cures by great words, in which there is not at all much benefit.
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
I say that in the swelling which comes to the breast before, there is no feeling nor sensation.
And also that which comes straight in two ribs, and one cannot cure except that one properly which comes to the back, as I say.
And that the patient be stretched on his back in one even place, and have a support under him, so that he does not sink.
Then put one splint at the head in earth-shaped formation, and one other at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and one other at the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and the minister knows the ligaments, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bones.
and they be well closed, the bones as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine, forming it, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of three arms long, and place it under the patient, and let the sick person lie on their side, and push the head of the board under the spine, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and place the minister his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see that [it], do it with the turning tool that turns by hand.
And it is that you put two staffs on the head of the patient from one arm and towards the feet two others, and between each staff, up and down, a palm's width of length.
And have in each staff one hole, where the turn rotates, and let the staffs be firmly in earth so that they do not move; and between two staffs have one turning staff, on which the linen turns, and have in two turnings two small staffs of a palm's length, to turn the turn.
And then tie the linen which is among the hams to the turn towards the head, and the other linen towards the feet to the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn on all the linen, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is evened, it places a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the compresses, and then the splint of a tablet of iii. inches long, which spans the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then binds it with a bandage, as we have said, and uses the patient of subtle nourishment, until it is healed;
And if any thing comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plank,
And sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one must not have presumption: by chance would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only by dislocation, not as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee to fire. and it is swollen with a hot abscess nearby because of the hip bone coming there.
And the sign of the one to whom it comes to the fire, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of the one to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well according to its fulfillment; however, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants him to move forward, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, he passes on his heel.
And the sign of the one to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip joint is at the place under the ribs.
The treatment of this type of dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for treatment; and there is no need for him to have presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocations, so hasten that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perchance it will return, and has need of other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it behooves you to prepare .i. minister strong, and extend the leg strongly with .ii. hands, or with .i. linen that be tied above the knee. And another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then tightens with a strip of linen on the hip; and another grasps the head of the linen.
and extend up and down all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, it is necessary to pay attention to its likeness. When the dislocation is at the side, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy rib, then put the band on the root of the hip, and the point which is below the groin, then extend the band upwards towards the groin, and towards the thigh;
then hold some other ministers his arms, and embrace the large area of the diseased hip, and extend it outward in shape: then it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong band above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then be hung from the top of a pole, and be two arms long above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the pelvis, and let other ministers hang with the patient, who embrace firmly the pelvis, because the joint now returns easily.
And when the dislocation is at the back, then let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has giddiness, and restrain one bandage on the injured leg properly, and on the foot also.
Then put two torches, one at the head and one at the foot, then place a torch between the legs of the patient to form him; And have a plant of wet cloths around him, so that he does not bleed the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the one who sets it puts equal on his hand to the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put him on one table, and press him as we have said in the glibosity, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the minister his pain to be on the aching joint, then press with the other hand, and extend it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the rear, it does not behoove to stretch the patient down, nor lift up the earth, but rather that he be as if his hip were dislocated in the rear, as we have said concerning lying on the two hips; And be upon his face, and the strap is stretched as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table;
And it will be at point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; therefore adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and the strain of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
And rest three or four days, then unbind it, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are even, strain it, as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind it, and allow them to walk well, until the limb is fortified.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not stop at his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and retract between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will be able to move his leg to his hip lightly.
And put the plaster on top, and make him raise his leg to his hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not try to walk, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely pulled out, both inside and outside.
And the signs of this are that the ankle is swollen, and tense before the part where it is dislocated:
The bringing back of this [dislocation] is light, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is only dislocated.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then it behooves you to make the patient sit upright, and hold him by one minister besides his leg, above the ankle;
then move the foot with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then bring it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards;
and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, begin the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put one paillasse firmly in the earth between his thighs, and tie cloth around it, so that the patient does not bleed;
Then hold the minister's thigh, and other ministers extend their foot to his hands or one linen cloth so that they tie it on the neck of the foot Then extend each minister equally, and the straps be even between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when one stretches him
Then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg down below, and the dislocation will return smoothly.
And when it is in place, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and strain firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the ties are not too tight;
then let him rest for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments are softened, so restrain it; then unbind on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for 4 days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes there, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the joints are dislocated, it is necessary to gently extend them without effort, and this is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table completely straight, and put your foot on what protrudes from these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns.
And when it is aligned and nothing protrudes, place a board under the sole of the foot at two inches, then strain it firmly, and let him remain for three days, then unbind it; and make him rest until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor too bold;
And use at the beginning of things soothing to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; And when you see hope in it, then reset the limb to its place, so that the pus comes out of the abscess hot;
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and treat the wound as it is fitting, with dried ointments.
And if the dislocation comes with a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And guard yourself from entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will bring you harm according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and your body. Amen
