O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine altogether and its fulfillment, and have made the end through its expositions and its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say 'surgery'.
And for this reason the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout everywhere, so it is perished the science and cut off, and there remains nothing of its force except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I will bring it to life together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine elongated. And it is necessary that he who deals with it mounts in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and bowels and the number of veins, and their movement and those moving and those resting, and the place of their exit.
And for this Hippocrates says that with the name it is much, and with the work little; and likewise in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, if he guards himself so as to avoid error and does not harm people; just as I have often seen more than those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and without experience.
Because I saw a fool who  cut, that is, an abscess of scrofulous or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; for which reason so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone of a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and within three days the man died.
And I have already been called to treat it, and I see the position of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one were to cut into it he would die.
And I saw another mire who took care of one duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant mire forced the fracture onto the wound as stars by very strong ligature, and did not leave any space to the wound, and left it like this; and he commanded that he should not untie it; and remained like this until the leg was completely swollen and the foot and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and untie the leg; and when I untied it it was at peace and he felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go by the member until that the members were all lost.
And see i. another mire which ruptures i. abscess inflames through the evil of his lordship.
Because ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not befit that one touch it with iron if it is not in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupt.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: that is to say,  work where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which it is necessary that you guard yourself, so that the foolish fools may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the fearsome illnesses to grief health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galens says in some of his admonitions: “Do not take on bad illnesses unless you want to be called a foolish fool.”
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of cauteries of medicine sharp, and the chapter ordered from the head to the feet; and of the shapes of the instruments, and of the implements of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Therefore as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of help and of the discomfort of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and of discomfort is the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret responses; and of this speak the most of the sages, and agree to this; and I am content with few words, because I fear the length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to every complexion where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some said that cauterization is great help; and others said the opposite: that cauterization is not good for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured of a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cautery does great aid to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it none times by experiment.
And in all ways, let no one intervene except him who has experienced it and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time;  of other complexions we have no more fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed on the cautery.
And know, sons, that cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Because the fire is simple, and does not come out other than to the member that is burned, and does not harm another member at all.
The ardent medicines come from one member to another by moving, and bring illnesses of great pain to the member; and perhaps kill the patient.
Fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I deprive you of the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what times should be made the cauteries, and how long are required.
And I say that cautery is fitting in all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains, before and until they cannot wait for the time when greater evil comes to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the fools do; because a sickness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are only medicine that alters complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of the pain, and is more effective than medicine for the speed of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And a certain thing is that sickness comes sometimes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the sickness and its virtue; and superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they are not worth, then we administer our cautery, and it is worth. Therefore it is clear that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burn of cautery does not cause rot, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they say.
And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold, and if it is too quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much; thus they do at the fire; and in this way there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our cautery of fire which we have made appear in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the feet, so that the way might be easier to find.
Of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two ways to do it because of a disease called “soda,” and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothache and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head three or four, according to what the virtue and age and custom of the patient can suffer; and then make a hole in the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your lap; after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where they come your two means, if it bleeds then extinguish the cautery which is called “olivare”, because this is the form:
And place it on its place marked with ink, and make in descending and drawing your hand poke and poke turning it; then lift your hand slightly, and look back at the place if you see the bone i.e. so small; and if you do not see it, then begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; after take i. poke of silk, and put in soft and moist cotton inside, and put on top of it, and let it for iii. days; after put on soft cotun in butter; and let it on until the burning is gone; after cure the wound of the ointment that is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it be healed.
And they said the ancients, that when more a wound stays open, more it purges; and for that reason so much aid moves.
And they said some of these that one must leave the cautery so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then reattach what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say that one must leave the cautery thus, and press so strongly that it lowers the bone as wide as a spool that women put in their spindles for which the humors come out moved; and one must leave the wound long uncovered; after that one must cure and bind.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more salutary and moved for me, and of this use I operate therefore in all together health.
Of the old pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasting long, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes to it the cautery that we have before said, and it is not worth.
Take ward if the shoulder of the sick person is of a strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize under that cautery one prick that we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said above, and make 1 cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there is 1 place where one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see to the bone: the sick person feels much more great pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries on the horns are thinner than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it is extended to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by medicines softening, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this profits not: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine sharp and of fire.
The cautery of sharp medicine is that you take a slice of alum, and remove the rind and cut it 1 poach as 2 shoulders, and then place the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can put back the slice of alum under the skin; and when it will be placed so, you tie it and restrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat fiercely the slice of garlic, and leave the wound thus for 2 days or 3; then put on cotton plugged in butter as much as possible.
After the curing of ointment until it is healed; and if you see this done of any burning medicines that I have written or do as the 10th treatment of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is as follows in this manner: Heat the cautery from which it is shaped:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has one pock of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and slightly move the fire, until half the thickness of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the spot for three days; then I put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare", at the very point, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not so old.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries before said from medicine and iron do not suit it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and then place it on the aching spot a line half a finger long, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain so that you do not cut the artery and do not come near the bone; and guard against the jaw from moving when one thrusts, and the nerve does not feel anything but the numbness and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear, even to him who does not know about it, and who has not studied and experienced; and leave the work half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is explained in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of extracting the artery, with the cautery that has 2 blades; and this cautery is better than the one and more helpful.
of the pain of the ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called "point," for this is the form:
After, point all around the ear of the sick one, or toward the two if the pain holds in both, and distance yourself a bit above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to burn; and make 10 points around each ear; then cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torments that must be cured by cautery are not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not make cautery to the appearances that come from dryness and spam of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of eyes and expectorations of head and gargarisms, and these are not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery to the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another one in the temple as long as a poce; and leave the cautery so long until the middle of the heart is burnt; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; afterwards, rub the head of the patient all over, and place on the occiput a plaster of mustard as is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
If he is healthy thus, it is good; and if he is not, do to him three cauteries of the embers on his head going down to the neck, and have a space between each cautery two of gros; and cure it as the others, and if you see it join, and the patient is suffering, do one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and let the cauteries be called "olivare," as I have said before.
of the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and what we have said before; after cleanse the head of the patient, then do cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is severe, do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart be burnt, and lighten your hand; after cure it until it is healthy, and let the cauteries be called "olivare" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except that which is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other remedies that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from much medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, one should make gargles and mastication modifying the brain often with cooked meats; after, they shave the head in the middle, and there one makes 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering much, one should make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, one makes 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When because of melancholy are the superfluities or the moistures corrupted and phlegm thick, then this cautery with those cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if because of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and is the body of the sick moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After cleanse the head of the patient; after make .i. tortil of linen well made, as well as .i. circle, if you put it in the head; and the sick sits crossed, and be well held on all sides; after apply the liniment, and worth moves of ram's butter ancient; and the heat at a moderate fire, so that the two should he able to bear it; after empty the circle from within the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with other good governance, until he be sound.
Or if you see the need to cauterize him, doing more points throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then place on top cotton moistened in butter and fat of a gelée.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient things purifying the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
After that, command him to raise his head, and make cauteries in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the awe is to the two eyes together, or one if the descent is in one; and cut all the cautery veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing, staunch it as best as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how you shall stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or hatereil under the two bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beside the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: 1 cautery removes the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or hatereil under the 2 bones; and if there is need more, then he cauterizes sagely above the eyebrow with every little cautery.
Of the course of tears from inside the eyes
When you medicate him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three ounces of wine; after the king the head, and make the cautery or middle olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two ears, one a little below the hair; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivare". For this reason, this is the form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let go of the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
Hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are even, then place the patient in your good health; after that, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign next to the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and musk-mallow on the eye, then heat the cautery as much as this form:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the hairs are burned there; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it so for three days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the scalding is removed; after the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place as you did first; and if the hairs are farther away, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and it be even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
The cauteries of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make of parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each ⅓., and grind together well; and make it hastening, so that it does not cool, then spread upon the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put above the paper the eyes; and if the illness holds in 1 eye alone, so must one work in 1, and if in both also; and put under the eye cotton moistened in a yolk of egg; and let the head of the patient be on your lap and put your hand showing upon the medicine, and press 1 peck and the loaf every time that the patient feels burning of the medicine, for it burns as of fire. When you have done this lengthwise, so remove the medicine with your hand. And when the burning will have passed, so raise the place with care, and reward yourself if you see the paper raised as if it were raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If not, so put again of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your works be equal, and your eyes put in point; then put above cotton moistened in butter until the kernels are burned, after cure the place of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and another, until it be sound.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that it does not fall from the medicine to the eyes.  And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the medicine again on that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him who is the study of this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy hand; and hold his head between your hands in such a manner that he does not move or lower his head; after putting moistened cotton in an egg white or in pear juice over the eye; after heat the cautery which is as: and is pointed at the head like the shape of a vulture's feather, together with which it is the cautery; if you see, so be it pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so be it as a tent; but nonetheless, this which is pointed is better for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work on it, and remove the pus from outside; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the side above the eye, that your hand does not make foolishness; and put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, restart the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for 3 days; after that put wet cotton in butter, and cure with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put on medicine of corrosive acid until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients said.  Attend to the fistula, and cut it open; after put in the opening 1 camphor subtle of which this is the form: and they make it to the quantity of 3 of plum; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and do not move the patient at all so that the plums melted do not run to their eye; and it is necessary one puts on the eye of the patient wet cotton in butter of quince or in ewe's milk: the plums will be the place of fistula, and the healing by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer purges to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
Of clefts in lips Many times clefts in the lips occur that are called “lips,” and also in the lips of children.
When you treat these clefts with the methods we have discussed in the sections, and the treatment is not effective, then apply one small scalpel cautery according to this form:
And he puts it carefully into those crevices until it comes to the bottom; after care the place with cerote until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made putrefaction and rot and is encased and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit; therefore it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or pierce of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron glows to the bottom of it, and to the last place; and do this once or two, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if this one is not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find it in its chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and this is not enough, then put the chief of the patient in your hand; after heat the cautery whose form will come here afterward in such manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot carefully, and hold so long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it for one hour and remove it forcefully.
And in such manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the gum softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dry.
of the pain of teeth
When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the remedies of medicine are not worth it, then there is need of cautery according to two manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of beech, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and wrap it on the point of a tent, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and thus do often as much as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moist wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one hot iron above until the fire comes to the summit of the tooth.
The cautery in the whole fire is such that you take a piece of iron or steel, and be so thick that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, for what its form will come afterward, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the heat of this cautery, and then root the teeth; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the iron as it comes after in form, and have 2 openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery on the other side; and put the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small put cauterize according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for 3 days; and put on moistened cotton in butter as long as the burn is removed; after care the place of ointment and bandages until it is healed.
When the moisture prevails over the channels of the throat, and also when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first voided by purgative medicines; afterward make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come even to the throat, and burn only about as much as a point. After that, make 1 other cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauteries be called "clavile" as we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the boil When all and sickness of boils are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is old, if he makes two cautery on the top of the boil in its viscera; and one other cautery between two nipples; and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see it, make cautery in pricking all the cautery which is called "point" because its form is before in the illness of the ears; and let the points up to thirty, or where they end. After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be at three reins according to this form:
And for these are the cautery lighter, because you make three in a copy.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then it is necessary that you reset the dislocation first. Afterward support the patient on his back and on his ribs; after lift the heart which is inside gently with the tips of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has 2 needles as follows:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and  the figure of the cautery should come together with 4 cauteries; and for this reason the cautery is made with the cautery which has 3 needles, so that the figure of the cauterization are 6 cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has 3 needles:
And sometimes is adjusted on this, namely, the nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After apply the cautery on small points mixed with silk; after make rest the patient, and let not the limbs be moved for long time until it is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing rarely happens, then make cautery on the thick of the clavicle cautery, or many cauteries in pricking. For the jointure is closed, and is removed the moisture and is healed the patient.
of the cautery of the pleura
The ancients said that one must make pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and also as thick and as long as your two fingers; and the moisten in oil, and the press on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauteries a point downwards in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning backwards a point; and one cautery amidst the breast, and one other above the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two as two ribs of the breast, outwards the cautery which is between two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
And the ancients said that no man uses a cautery of fire seeming to one razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and jump out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three kinds of cautery that are good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, in line according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be laid on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nubs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the keel which is above the mouse, or where the patient's cut comes from the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the keel be according to the keel, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After it puts the 2 nerves inflamed until the ears are pierced on the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and thus there will be 4. And if you see so, cauterize to all the cautery at 3 nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
of dropsy
Cauterizing is not good for dropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes." When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it behooves you to make 4 cauteries around the belly, and 1 on the stomach, and 1 on the liver, and 1 on the spleen, and 2 behind the back on the spine, and 1 place in the hip; and let the cauteries be well near the edge of the heart.
After leave the cautery open for long time to fight rot, and let not the care of the sick after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clam that we have in front shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is here put before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and they are full of yellow fluid, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and raise your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep within, thus will squeeze out the yellow fluid, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After do two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the cuvette; and let the cautery long, one below the knee front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing that it well be; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in stomach and in intestine is flebbed, and cannot be cured by ways of cures; and you see the patient suffering well and of strong virtue, so do one great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the subtle bud for every one cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the loins.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the foundation or one or more, and they are old and are large with cold and moist humors corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help at all, so make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, this one that is completely outside beneath the small intestines point to point in a triangle, and one cautery below the buttock two fingers;
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one makes 1 great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and 1 other on the liver, and 1 other on the mice to all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut the "thelul", then heat the cautery which seems 1 razor, and then put it entirely inflamed on that "thelul" cut; and leave it as long as your hand until the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, because of which the blood is short; make this one or two times, and if there is much "thelul", you cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointment profitable as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then comes such a disease that can only be cured by cautery.
When any fistula comes about, and is filled with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, if the lesion seems to have a depth of one finger breadth, and you know it thoroughly how deep it goes, then after applying the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the finger breadth has entered, and repeat the cautery as long as the flesh, which is putrid and corrupted, is burned, once or twice or three times, according to the amount of its need; and guard yourself from burning the nerves that are inside, and the large veins. If the fistula goes toward the bladder and intestines, then guard these places, and only make incisions in fleshy parts, and think it has not pierced through; after treatment, care for the area until it is healed, and if the wound has closed, and the materials have been removed long ago, then know that the wound is completely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is treacherous, and the bone at its base is corrupted; and so like one of those that we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes as rains, and of great windiness, and does not take a husband, then it is necessary that you do cautery on the flanks on one side and the other with the cautery clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will give greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I do cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our thumb; and I do one cautery outside the back, or two if you have need; and let the cautery clavicle be according to the form previously said.
of the marsh When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for this to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one do them .iij. cauteries around the bud, as we have said of the cautery of the bladder, and .ij. cauteries outside the back; and let the cauteries be pointed, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found in the region of the viscus, therefore it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint with .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make three cauteries of the olive tree, large, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the others; and cure it until it is healed.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the bone of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in the division and the cure is not good, and the illness is old: then it behooves you to purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After that you make cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together with ardent medicines, and cautery of fire. Cautery of fire is according to many manners, some of which are such: that you cauterize on the bone of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them a good depth and great, and let there be between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for which reason there are four according to this form:
And if you see, then cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circles contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart are burned.
And this is the manner one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then one makes .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and .i. cautery above the ankle 4 fingers, at the left part a point; and be the cautery cuticular, and be burned the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 fingers of the foot or near it, then one cauterizes where he feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. with the cautery which is called «poins».
And if it be necessary, one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes cautery with the cuticular or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so much that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do no more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen more than a few who had cautery done on the ankle of the foot, and they left them so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a solution of belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise said about the cautery of the hip, for which reason it is this manner, make one such iron and let it be at the top as thick as a thimble, or a little less, and let it be between stitches and let it be from one stitch to the other with spacing the quantity of a knuckle of the hand; and let the stitches be opposite two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be one handle of iron well made; and this is the form:
And be it heated until it is all red and feel its heat, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and let it be turned over to the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery rent and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound covered for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and few see who uses it; and nonetheless those are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is needed.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too much evacuation, or by similar appearance of spread cold matter, none of these appearances are worth cauteries, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be rid of fetid pills or other similar things that one makes on their back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with incise, and in each line 5 cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see it, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the clavical middle cautery according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes above the other spines.
When you see this and want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be near one another. After cure the place as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not bring the cautery in a site which is in the spame of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints is from humors that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call properly “gout,” and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the hot cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then you make cautery to the whole cautery which one calls “point.” And if the pains come as far as the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you make cautery on each knee three or four cauteries from each side, with all the olive-shaped cauteries; and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand for longer than the tip of the cautery is burning.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the shoulders or elbows, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and prescribe medicines. For if you do good governance to him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the thigh
When rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the hips and it is new, then when you see it cured, let him not urinate that day; and let him use things which lift the belly, so that the cord descends from his belly; after, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his leg as long as the testicles are repaired, and move them to your thighs, and direct the incision below the rupture upon the bone of the hip, and a sign that is similar to half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery with this form:
until it is white and it gives off fumes. Then move the testicles to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return back; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put below him i cussin and i serjant on the thighs, and i other on the leg which holds his hands; then put the cautery upon the sign with all your might, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, recommence it again another time until you come to the bone; and beware subtly that the testicle does not escape when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn it; and that through this the patient does not die, or other evils.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of great people also large according to their measure; after 3 days cure the wound with butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie 40 days on his back until the wound is well united; and it is necessary that his dressings be laid long, so that the boil does not protrude when he wants to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, if he is given a good bandage and he wears it for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too much exertion; and when he follows this instruction, he will be healed completely. And I shall say here after the cure of incision in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make one cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be it at the third part of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with the cautery in three angles according to this form:
but first sign the place of the rupture and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another outside, and keep your hand in between the whole cautery clavil. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of ancient pain in no limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or from striking, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsions and of its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, it is well; if it does not heal, begin another cautery on top of that one, because it is customary that it must move to the limb that is nearest, therefore it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of treachery
The mesentery is aided at times by cautery with great help, and also the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take heed if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not lessen or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one midway down the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the temples; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand remain so that the cauteries come to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the gross humors may be able to escape; and cauterize the mice according to what it is before.
And if the mesentery is spread everywhere; and it appears clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and 1 cautery on its neck, and 2 cauteries on the spine of the collar, and 6 cauteries on the spine of the back, and 1 large one on the hip and 1 other on the side, and 2 on the 2 shoulders; and 2 on the knees, and 2 on the tendons of the thigh, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard yourself from the nerves that are on the last calcaneus, that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cautery on the bone of the forearm, and 1 other on the bone of the stomach, and 1 other on the liver.
And know that when more cauteries are made, the more help is done, and it benefits; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery as the healthy ones feel it, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in manners of irons. After cure the wound with flour of wheat with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of inflammation
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery and to the hand and to the foot and to the back, at the exit of the nerve that mutes the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nonetheless let no one interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of breeches
When the disease which is called "albaras" is present, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize with a cautery a point through and through, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the blemished part is removed, and its color changed; then cure with flour of rice and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondras, of each one part; and let everything be mixed together, and let it be bound with a cloth, and let it air at the site until it is healed.
The cure of a boil by cautery
When a boil first comes, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with the cautery which seems i.e. circle, all around the circumference of the boil. And nonetheless the wise ones say that one does cautery also in the middle of the boil; and nonetheless this to me does not seem well, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen several times; and a more correct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said in many types of cautery.
of the swelling that cannot die
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati," and it takes time to die or because of the superfluity that it produces or because of the water of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the heat; and you see it hasten to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterward leave it as it is. Because it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced throughout with the cautery, then heat the cautery of this which is its form:
And put your hand in the middle of this malady which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning in such a way that the course of the rot be healed. Afterward care for it until it is perfectly cured.
The cure of fire by iron
There is another kind of malady which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a gangrene of the limb, because it wastes away the members as if fire were to burn the tendons dry. If you see this malady in a place that can endure cauterization together with fire, then sharpen the cautery small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the malady is; after which cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all that is corrupted be removed. And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places broiled with oil until the scars of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of  ointments generating flesh.
of the spurs that come to the feet
Many times it happens that in the feet by fire a sickness arises which is called “clots” according to our understanding, and it is a great thing that troubles the foot. And the cauteries for this sickness are thus in two ways. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat one cautery, as if it were a feather of a vulture, and be made of good iron, to the measure that it may bend the nail from all sides, and that there are subtle margins; after that place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it comes to the root of the nail; and leave it so for three days until it begins to get rotten; then I make a plaster of wild mallows mashed with seel, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will fall and be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the place with ointment enjanrant char until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, it behooves you that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in this manner: take a iron chain or iron, or a feather of a vulture, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say spurs and warts; and put the chain so that it may encompass all around, then I put a pock of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water path deep until the root; and suffer the patient a pock the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave him so, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. Thus do one after another, as long as you uproot all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments which engender flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold of nerves, or from quartan fever or other, it is fitting that you make to him .iiij. cauteries or .iv. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each spine; and .i. cautery or pez, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; so let him stop trembling, and hasten the healths from the cold sickness.
of pus-filled blisters
Sometimes they appear by fires the body bathes, or pus-filled blisters that come from large corrupted matters. So it is fitting at first when they appear that one make cautery on each head of the blister: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, so that its point be taken to the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or to the lenticular cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from them afterward, but are dispersed the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times great hemorrhages occur from the artery that is cut at the wound which comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to extend.
And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your two index fingers upon the wound of the vein and restrain it strongly until the blood is quieted under your two fingers, and no drop issues forth more; then put to fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are all red; then grasp one, or a large or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery upon that vein where you hold your fingers, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is restrained.
And if it jumps forth when you lift your fingers from upon the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to make these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when a vein shrinks from the artery, it cannot be well tightened even when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines placed upon which have power to tighten the vein; and be bound and strained properly.
Who will bring a tightening of the ligature or tight bandaging or placing burning things upon it, or similar things, if it does not profit so much.
And if this happens to any and he has no medicine present, then he must put his two fingers upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind it until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but often moisten it with cold water that be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and tightened; and make then those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all illness in which it is necessary cautery of fire, or burning medicine, and incisions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter from the head just to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those one finds more easily those one wants.
And therefore as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. For many kinds of people come to cures. So they come from those who have become so ill with their illness that they die easily because of the foolishness that they find in their illness, and of the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give their sense and say: “Wait, I am healed”; and the illness is deceitful. It does not behoove you that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your sick to what health is converted; and these will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and memory of length.
Most dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to you by chapters, according to those that are before, the chapter of cauteries, which I have told you from the head to the feet, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
The head full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the birth is strained too hard the child's head; and some time it comes from a reason unknown.
And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment  in these ways.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and they thought so much moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled below the bone under the scalp, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such as if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the head a wide fissure; and it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture goes; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, do two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the sutures of the head open from each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you; then it is necessary that you cut in the head three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision extract the moisture entirely out. After extract the slits of cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in it, and leave so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound by tents and by ointments, and leave to constrain the chief bandage, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture as long as the limb is strengthened and healthy.
And another manner of incision is that you look where appears the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of liquid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore, cut where the abscess appears, and its filling of liquid, and make it according to what you have power over it; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the decrease of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of summary
When it happens to anyone a disease which is called 'catarrh' in the eyes or at the breast, and the sickness is old, and the medicine cure profits not at all, then the last cure is the cautery with these one copes the .ij. arteries.
It befits therefore, when you see to cover them, that the patient bends his head back; after which rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then bind the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the places of each are behind the ears, and those are returned; then mark the places with an enche, then cut each with a sharp spatula of .ij. parts. so that the tail comes up to the bone, and this be by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also as .ij. fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood leaps out from above continuously.
And if the artery does not open at the touch, you must measure the quantity of space of .iii. digits, then sign and cut until the bone; and that which it is necessary to put out blood is .vj., and by adventure a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point without any syphilis, you must cut it so that an abscess does not come, then restrain the wound and bind it, and the cure with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient sores and similar things, and it is medicated by manners of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit them, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes back the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not easily replaced except in some men who are too cold; and if it is replaced, he strains the neck of the patient with some drapery, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which is the shape:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then tear it upward as pincers, and depart well from the webs that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it with the point of the uncinate hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two chills. For if it is not cut off, it will not jump out without pain altogether.
And draw out the blood from six ounces, up to three; and if the artery is large, it behooves you to tie it in two lengths of a strong double thread of silk, so that rot may not come before the healing of the wound, and there be excessive bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the two ligatures at the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize with the cuticular cautery up to the bone until the chills are cut; and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and he is of hot complexion.
For the cautery is aid to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help against moistures. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put on tents well made; and when they are undone, may be cured with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a bit of the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place with vitriol and strain your hand that the wound be staunch; and if you do not have those things present, put on the place your finger until the wound is congealed, and raise the place of cold water until the bleeding stops, and it be strained as much as it is required; and what is more helpful and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery trenching of .ij. parts, but the trenchings be well spaced to keep longer their heat. For when the instruments are too thick, it holds less its heat. And must have between the two knives one of a good width, and then when you have marked the two parts with your knife, and you place the red-hot iron on it until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two fingers; and be kept apart the two arms because it is not well joined by this cautery at all; and that is the shape of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on the forehead of the head of fire, and it does not profit medicine treatment when it is done, and you see the face of the sick person wrinkle, and feel on his forehead ambulation as if from tremors; and where the eye is wet and moist so that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are dried up, and burned by the heat of tears, such a cure is necessary.
And they called it in the old days “a bruised cure,” and is that you do to the patient who has this illness the hairs that he has or front, then him make .iij. incisions or front equally according to the length of the front; and be one of the incisions as .ij. do all over the front going down until neif, and the other .ij. as .ij. ribs above the cheekbones, and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries that are at the .ij. ribs above the cheekbones; and move your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. jaws, and be each wound the quantity of .iij. do across joins;
from the incision which is under the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the kernel that is between the .ij. incisions to tot lou syfac which is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract further this spatula.
if it is put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is the form: And put the sharp edge toward the flesh near the heart, and the blunt edge toward the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches the opening near the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle fissure up to the other opening; and then draw out the blood evenly, and express the place for the blood drawn; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and asafoetida, and guard that an abscess does not come; and on the third day untie the thread, and then administer great quantity of warm water, then the cure of ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures which one uses for curing wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When to any one comes an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes red and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is affected by a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is there, so it is this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large incision between the eyebrows, and another from one side to the other. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then carefully place between the two sides of the incision old cotton wool, and linen bandage; then tie above with cloth moistened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to form, then treat it with drying things that make char dry up.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it on these wounds to dry up the char completely.
of the stopping up of ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone or similar thing as iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
When something falls into the ear, such as a stone or another kind of thing that does not fit in the ear or grow in the ear, place the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze forcefully with condisments, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards.  Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with fine pincers, of which this is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with the fine single-edged tool; and if it does not come out by this, make a wire loop and insert the head of the loop or through the opening of the ear forcefully, and stop what is around the loop with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter with the loop; then pull it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, take a bit of wool which is used to catch birds, and put it on any instrument which is pointed for doing this, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the wool onto the stone or whatever thing it is, and pull it out. And if it does not jump from all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear so that an abscess comes out, and spasms; and the manner of the cutting is that you first bleed the patient of the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it gently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer i. spathule tenve subtle according to this form:
and administer an incision of that grain. But do not make this when you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
In the ear therefore when water falls, it is fitting that the patient use an external of first conditions, and open the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it goes out by itself, it is good. If it does not go out, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb thick and light, and heat them a little in fire; and put it into the patient's ear, and raise it with his hand from the other side, and place another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this of stone in stone until the water comes out entirely, and so if it all goes out; and if you see, then take one reed, and put one end into the ear, and the other end hold in fire until the more tender part of the reed is burned; then make another piece of reeds and do this until the water comes out entirely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel it, then administer extraction of pincers; and this is the thing easier to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is fitting that you look at the ear in the sun: if you see no worms, then treat them with subtle pincers; and if they do not appear, then take the cane of which this is the form:
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed form to all the chain; do this so often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff around the chain with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see:
And be of silver or iron, it is narrowed below to 1 small openings, and above open for distilling; and for pressing within the distillation 1 instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take 1 razor and wrap around the tip conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines in the chain, and the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and the feeling of the patient within, and let the distillations be 1 pock heated over the fire so as when it is distilled in the ear; and keep that it be not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
of the stopping of ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by means of a wound, or a piece of flesh born inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes come from within the ear, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes they happen .i. poc (one) by force and the hole is seen well.
That one which comes from within so that it cannot be seen, is of grievous harm in many cases, and in this, you should place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the hair appearing, then the work has taken its full course, for this is how it is formed.
And be careful and cut in front and behind all the way through, so that it does not blister the ear; if the hair is from flesh born or a piece of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers and cut it lightly, until all of the flesh is removed.
And if the inflammation is in the ear, take one sharp and light razor and heat it a little in the fire, then put it on the body of the ear. If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce lightly, and guard that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on ground vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
of the sheet of paper
This ailment which comes on sheets of paper from the eyes when they are moist and are dry, it is necessary that you stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and cut it with a spatula from its roots; then put on top vitriol ground.
And if without it being cut out, you cauterize with a subtle lentil-shaped cautery, and the cauterization after the incision heals well; and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the sprain
Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem broken in its shape and in its hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "hail", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hail moves on one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the long way, then the skin from each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and the cut. If you cannot cut without piercing a point in the paper, so it does not harm the patient; and if the fissure is large, so the assembly a seam, and the cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the ointment restores it quickly and hinders flesh.
And if the hail is descending into the inside of the ear toward the top, so reverse the paper, and being the hail to tweezers, and the cut and pressed on both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not harm; and when the hail is cut, let the eye of salt water, and cure the place of that which hinders flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a grease that is made in the tissues of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to other people, and it grieves their eyes, and they come to them cataracts in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces aside, and sleep like that, and are their tissues below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your breast; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach from each part, then put it on him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with a pointed spatula, a fissure of a width, and not be more than the wound one makes in the vein; and make the skin cut to the bottom until you come to the exinach; and in more cases comes exinach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract therefore with all one piece of cloth charpit between your fingers on the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, until you come to the whole spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind him.
And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the incision, then carefully widen the incision slightly until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in wine and water, and put them on top, and bind with bandages.
And if it is for such men who grind moss and put it on top to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat it until it is healed. And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healed.
of the hairs of the papers
When in papers hairs grow crooked other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes and bring many diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, so much that it is because of the destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. ways: either by cautery together with fire, or by medicine ague according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then insert a needle to .i. thread above; and let this be below the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow near these hairs, and draw .i. thread up to all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the crooked hairs, to all the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put below the paper a small tent of cotton and drapeil, then place on top of the paper a figure of enche, such as the myrtle leaf, and anyway it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see to raise the paper which is devised to all.
And if to him who needs a large quantity of paper is cut according to what the paper is softened; then make at all spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the larger tear to the small; and let one be of the incisions near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the oncine into one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then peel it all; then assemble the .ij. lips with a stitch of a needle to .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air dry the superfluity of threads above the .ij. eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, take no care, then leave the stitching and threads for .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without stitching with drying and constricting things, because the paper comes back to the sound of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you trace the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, to 3 ounces apart according to the form which is here:
then cut what surpasses the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you lack power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle which has 1 thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put one other thread beside the large tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin over what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the 2 lips of the wound by stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is converted: so you must use what we have said about incision; but the stitching on one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of the thorns is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. thorns by art, and .ij. subtle ties as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut off the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly on top of the paper above the eye, and restrain the .ij. thorns of the .ij. parts that form; and let it so for some days, and the leather which is restrained will die and wrinkle and carry, as long as it dries by itself.
If it delays, then cut off more forces, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is stitched together, and if the paper has been lifted, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. thorns that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you prick a fine needle, and put one thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the shoulders and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and tie the chief of the threads; then put the patient's head on your healthy one; and be under the sun so that the work is clarified, because it is a subtle and small work; then put the needle all the way to the chase into the root of the hair joint, and make it pierce the paper hastily as long as you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand until the hairs come out all the way to the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then draw the chase downwards to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair is hardened in its place and the flesh grows up; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair with the natural ones, and raise it with that one or leave it, as long as it is lengthened and then lift it.
of the rotting of the eye
When this disease which is called “aleacrati” or rot comes in the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens by sudden cutting, or incision, or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of treating it is that you cut open the sore, and separate its edges, and put inside lint wads, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not good that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do so, the disease returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or aloe and linseed are cooked, and diachylon ointment melted in any oil, and wrap a wad around it, and treat it with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the flesh that comes in the eye
This illness that is called “axacrati” truly is “dislocation,” and it is both natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauteries and similar things; and the way of the work on it is that you pierce an needle, in which there is .i. double thread, and place it into the flesh, and let it go through from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads come in .ij. chies of the flesh; then lift the flesh above all the needle, and cut at .i. spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is proper, it is good; if not, then take one razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make .ij. fissures or cuts inside the paper; and let the chies of the .ij. fissures be at the .ij. angles of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has for name “i griesche”; then remove the flesh, according to the quantity that its cost is raised below, from what follows the paper, then adjust the .ij. severed parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then treat it with those that we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the malady comes from a tear or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above; then sew between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip anything of all their power how they make return the figure to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in more dispositions.
of the sewing of the paper
When this suture happens to a human hand in such a manner that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the being as pincers, until you cut what is attached to the spatula, which should be neither too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too thick does not wound the eye; and let your incision, by which you remove that assembly, be light, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all of that assembly, and do no times in the salty water of the eye, and the lift of fresh water, and of collyrium; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in egg white; and after the third day use collyrium and things soft until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in .ii. manners: it is nervous and similar to .i. hard syfac, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one cooks it panre as pincers, it cannot do; and one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear duct, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in your hand, then they open their eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as pincers with small curvature, and bring it upwards; then take a needle, and put .i. hair of horse, or boar, or ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a poc and insert it into the angle, and pierce it all the way through the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and bring it upwards, and scrape along the entire edge of the angle following the curve and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining part in the root of the tear duct all around with the subtle spatula and as small forces, and leave the natural char or tear duct, so that by incision the body of tears does not come accustomed; and no times extend the angle alone, and to the thread, as we have said; then scrape on the entire spatula below of which is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision, put in the eye a bit of ground silk, and of the collar made of lead, and let it stay until the next day; then cure it as much as it needs until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the pincers cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, do the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light bit sharp according to this form:
And raise the nail slightly, and if you see that it does not decrease and the reasoning accelerates, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of lead and red collar and ground silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, as long as it is completely removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil abscess, then milk it, and treat the boil first until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it at the corner, and cut a part and not half altogether, that no body of tears comes out; then distill in the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
of the flesh that arises on the pupil
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the pupil and restrains upon the eyelids and turns them outward, and seems like a rose of ballast; and the work is that the patient puts his head on a healthy one, then the worker opens the eyes, and coils all that flesh with suitable tweezers to this, and sustains it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the razor until the end, and be careful that you do not prick the eye during the work; and let the incision be of the spatula that we have said in the incision of the angle and the small forces of which one removes the sebum, as the form shows after this chapter.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply the crushed oil of silphium or distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and place on top of the oil cotton with binding of egg white, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the wound does not rise, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as long as flesh is joined in the eye by this semblance.
But nonetheless it is necessary that you align the cure of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member suffers from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the eye are harmful to sight and weaken the eye every day. Therefore, it is important that you first look at the eye, in which the red vein is, whether before or after, and there is no other illness except for the red vein; therefore, act in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy hand, then suspend those veins throughout the whole of the sinew according to his wisdom, and let the thread be subtle double according to this form:
And let two threads be by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then, with this coil, as forcibly suspend those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatulas, and make this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, then instill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrode what remains of the red vein.
And if you cannot collect all these in that hour, make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it lie for some days until the pain is calmed and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
of the eye fistula
The mire are called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it by cautery and by medicine burning hot according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you open on the abscess, where it must die, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, if the king has all the instruments of what is here the form; and it is called "sharp chief", and is made of fire iron to one chief reont, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And place it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is reset; and do this several times, then return to the place of drying medicines.
If the bone is joined and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is joined, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not renew and is not festering, and a bad accident does not come, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, if there is no other way than to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at 3 angles, and the shaft be thinned until the head as you see here:
then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand from the eye i.e. 1 finger width, then turn to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through that which comes in this if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the places, then goes the matter to the cheek; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
of the eye's issue
When the eyes are open throughout and there is no disturbance in the cheek, or lessening, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal, then place suction cups or a hat on them without injuring to suck, then put on the eye i. one layer made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then restrain the eye, and plaster it over with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each one in 4, and then put one above the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then strain it from above with a stiff bandage form, and recommence suction cups to suck without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the plasters soften, then it is necessary that you strain them very much; then remove the plaster after a day and a night, and if you see the eye repairing, it's good; if not; then begin again the plastering and the bandages and the plasters and the suction cups until it is healed.
about the dislocation of a woven cloth
When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and it comes forth from the papers like i. grain of resins, and it is explicable to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle in the root of the part below until the one above, then put another needle where there is i. double thread of the part of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the end of the double thread and tie a part of the weave together, and restrain it well, then remove the needle and put on the eye with half an egg white; and let it stay until the threads are joined with the weave, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the weave on each side with a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter then immediately; then remove it until it is healed.
of the pouch of the eye
This disease which is called “alcunnati” is nothing but the pouch which is assembled in the eye, appearing like a water dropping down, and it is not water; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a .i. seat prepared and straight, then take the head between your hands of .ij. parts, and move it as much as you see the pouch coming up to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and be disheveled light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend down, know that it is water, and if the descent of the pouch is not prepared as we have said. so make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula subtle and make on the cornea veil .i. poc by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the pouch issues; and when it is issued, so distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then be cured of other cure until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have seen the appearances of the eyes in division, and what is necessary to examine; so in work according to the health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light for the sun, and tie his good eye and hold it very firmly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if his eyes are left, or on your right hand if his eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if his eyes are left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if his eyes are right; then put the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a thread in that white part of the eye to the part towards the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument which is called "almagda" skillfully, and hold back your hand until it pierces the white of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument until it reaches where the tear is, then express it from one way after another. If the tear comes now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest, i.e., a little, and if the eye returns to the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensconced and it does not rise, extract the almagda gently by turning your hand poco a poco; and then put back in the eye a bit of silk gem, and leave from those the eye inside. Then put on the outside of the eye a stopper or linen moistened in rose oil and honey, and tie with the good eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on top as coming broiet with honey.
And if the almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, then it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which this is the shape:
And therefore pierce only the conjunctive, and do not make it too deep, but make one subtle, then put almagd, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, equip the patient with one doctor coming, in which he sleeps on his back in one dark place; and be careful of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in the same dark house, and examine his sight, and let him see some things, and then put him back the tie until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you alight this, because the water rises quickly.
When the abscess comes from here, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the address of this who soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, then untie the sight and put on his face one orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house. And then go out of the house slowly and gradually, and return to his affairs; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almagd pierced, so that one sucks the water, but anyway I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them see them; and be of the grain properly.
And let the head of the same subtlety, and the last in three angles sharp.
of the cartilage from the nose
Sometimes cartilages are born or nose cartilages joined together in various ways, so that some seem like scorpions with many limbs; and if there is one of these where the cartilage is cracked of bad color, and if there is cartilage soft of good color. In that one then of these cartilages which is soft, and not cracked, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and put the forceps on those cartilages, and pull them out; then cut that which you are able to sustain with the sharp fine spatula on one side, until you know that the cartilage is completely removed.
And if there remains any thing that one cannot cover, open it to all i.e. the instruments subtle and lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without tear or abscess, then secure it as is proper; and if it is malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and are removed all the humors, then giete or wine or water.
If the nose works and moisture comes up to the mouth, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not break as proper, know that there is flesh in the bone above, therefore the instruments do not come to cut; so it behooves you to put i.e. a thread of linen a little thick, and be knotted by hands ours, and have between each knot an interval i.e. half or less; and put the patient's shoulder on the thread in his nostril at its end, and pull until it comes through the nostril inside the mouth; and many times do children at school this, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and feel each after the other while being as we which are or thread. Do so until you know that the knot has corrupted all that flesh; then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this iij days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nose a patch of wool for some days until it is healthy, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a basin, and lead it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed basin, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have one handle on the top for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the flesh upon the nerve
Many times upon the nerve of the head a disease arises called "telul," and grows and becomes large indeed, until it is a terrible thing to behold; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all of it, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays cutting it until it is large, be warned, if it is hard, of dark color, of poor feeling: do not touch it with iron for it is an inflamed abscess, because when you cut it any time, much evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not dark in color, and you see that one can cut it all, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying things and restraining.
when the nerve is cut and covered
Know that when a separation of the continuation comes in one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, for in some men. It is therefore necessary when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core as long as they bleed, then assemble the two lips to a stitch, and restrain them, and powder over powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and put above the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster welding, and let it remain until it falls by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In men's mouths, abscesses hard like grains of corn appear, some smaller and some larger; therefore you should turn the lips and cut above each one with a knife, take it with forceps and cut it in each part; then put vitriol powder on the incision site until the blood is stopped; and then apply a salve, and care for the area with dry things until it is healed.
of the gum's flesh
Many times flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore you should hold it with pliers and cut it at its root, and let the wound bleed; then put vitriol powder or other astringent and drying powders on the site; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which happens often, cut it a second time and cauterize it; if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are assembled at the chief of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sores that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and greenish, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are smelly; so it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws in your saint, and pull out the teeth or the scabs appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do of the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, as long as they are worldy; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those no, then it begins again on the second day and the third, until you have all pulled; and know that the teeth need various forms of instruments to pull, according to what the work shows them, because the scraper with which one pulls out the outer teeth has other forms than those with which one pulls between the teeth; and these forms and others be prepared with you.
It behooves when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to draw as much blood as possible, because one should not do it poorly; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for pulling. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you are certain about the tooth hurting.  Many times the pain of the patient deceives, and he thinks that it is a tooth saint, and makes treat the good tooth; and nonetheless does not depart the pain for this, as long as the evil remains, because we have already done this to our kin; and when you are well certain about the tooth hurting, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth to all its.  a spatula strong to ward off the gums from all parts; then move it at your two or with tongs subtle in the first prick and prick, as long as it is well loosened, then firmly affirm the pliers; and let the head of the patient be in your hand between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out free, take any of these instruments and put it inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with bandages, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with pliers so that it does not break when extracting; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And therefore be very careful that you do not break it, and leave a part, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And guard yourself that you do not do as ignorant kin do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break any time the bone, and do not bring what we have contained; but they cause to come sometimes by the questioning of this great illness for the roots that remain there, or for the bone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol ground; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, to which one must first make teeth, are at long points and with large handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be of well-made iron, and be toothed to hold securely.
From the root of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, then it is necessary that you put on the spot cotton moistened with butter i. day or ii., until the place be softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri", for which the head seems like a beak of care; and be inside made as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and put there the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because of this is its form:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, it is good; if these do not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two prongs, of which is its form:
and other iron instruments which are in front in the fashion of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large pliers, of which is its form:
And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, for there are such illnesses where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one does not break a bone or of the other bones, or he can, then search for the instruments that it is needed, that I have told you, and help with gestures, from which this is the form: And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to its natural body, and the form is ugly, and especially in chaste women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot smooth it nor file it; therefore the ridge; and if it is joined with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to .i. small beak, and be of sharp iron at its summit:
And the coping is little by little in the hands for a few days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then the file of a piece like this is the shape.
And it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in a few days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plain at the end to all without a razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not bleed the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front is moved, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it to move it so that it does not fall out, and you have cured them with medicines constricting, and it does not work; if it is necessary to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the thread of silver becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too small nor too large, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see to straighten the teeth, take the thread and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the cheek between the teeth as there are one or more, until you come intelligently to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the part where you began, and strain your hand subtly and intelligently, so that it does not move at all; and let the ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the threads of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; then leave it tight as long as it can remain, and if it unties, or the thread breaks, then restrain it with another thread; let it remain and serve this way until the end of its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two misplaced ones, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said; and let no one intervene who is not wise and patient, and at some time the form of a tooth made of bone from a hoof is made, and it is placed in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restrained as we have said, and it remains and serves this way for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
At no time is this ligament that comes under the tongue or natured, that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound joined; and the work is such that you work the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament broad, until the tongue is displaced from its dwelling; and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from the joining of a wound, so put the awl and cut the broad ligament; and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift the place with warm water and ease, or with cold water; then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and bandage the patient each night, so that the place cannot join. And if bleeding comes, so put on the place vitriol ground; and if the bleeding does not stop, so cauterize it with the lentiginot cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other cures until it is healed,
And if you see it of dark color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, so put the awl, and make it with a subtle spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding persists in your work, so put on vitriol ground until it is stained, then return to your work as long as you draw all out; then lift the place with warm water and cold, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there comes from within the throat boils that are called «godath», and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and whitish color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent blood loss; but leave it until it is dead, and then you will split it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of whitish color and the root is subtle, have your instrument prepared to cover it, but first look if the abscess is warm and calmed. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your lap, and open the mouth and put the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue below to all the instrument, this is how it is done; and be it of silver or iron as subtle as a knife:
And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the pincers and put them in the almond, and pull up with force as much as you can; and do nothing of these things with the cloths, then cut with the instrument, this is how it is done, that seems like forces; and nonetheless the chief are bent, one place against another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you don't have this instrument present, cut with pliers, this is how it is done:
And be cutting on one side, and the other side not; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and vinegar, and if a discharge of blood occurs, gargle the patient with water, or the peels of pomegranates are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stanched; then treat it until it is healed; and no time others abscesses arise in the throat than the two almonds, so cut them like the two almonds as well.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, that is to say one abscess of small size; and I had almost entirely closed the entire throat so that the woman could not expire through the passage which was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained so for one or two days. And the abscess was raised so much that it had been put two fingers by the two openings of her birth.  I therefore immediately took a knife and placed one in one opening, then I pulled out a large portion of pus; then I fixed another piece in the other opening of the birth canal, and I opened the mouth and pressed her tongue; after that I inserted the knife into the abscess and cut part of it, and only a small amount of blood came out; and thus the passage of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back to fill the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I grasped it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left these parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
of the grape
When the grape is full and long, it is called «perpendicular»; and if it is very large and round, it is called «grape». When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the abscess head is calmed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and the one which is round assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a red color or black, then you should cauterize the incision of it. Because there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, from its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue on the instrument which we have mentioned before; then put the needle into the grape, and pull it out, and cut it at i. of ii. instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; because if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to be cut, then you must use him of a tool for the cauterization of the senses of fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp acute. And it is that the patient puts his head on your shoulder, and then presses the tongue on the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confis with live hot coals, so that it is not too thick nor too light; and in using the end of this instrument, of which this is the form:
And have or head a hair that one puts the medicine in, as like the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine on top of the grape; and let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle will come from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the larynx; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it burning and the medications of the medicine are calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the chain above, until the cotton dries on the grape; and do this often, as long as the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and leave it after four or five days. And if you have need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then begin it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, of cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles as long as it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, or the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysop and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in 1 pot, and put it inside, and make it boil; and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot have 1 instrument shaped according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be put into the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the ulcer through the cane, until the ulcer is mortified; afterwards, he begins again often, until the ulcer dries, and guard that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do this at all except for the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put inside its head a piece of egg, so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; for the piece of egg does not let the vapor bother the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Many times a fish bone or spine gets lodged in the throat, or some other thing; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue in the sun with all your instrument, so that you see the thing move; and that which does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit, as long as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will bring forth the thing by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1 morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge 1 thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will lodge itself, and then you draw forth; and if it does not come forth by those things which we have said, then take 1 instrument of lead according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted up; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come loose, nor push in the bone; and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he will know whether or not the thing is difficult; if he pushes down, or he draws it forth equally throughout the entire instrument, until it is forth.
of the bleeding of the throat
At no time is medicine given for bleeding of the throat, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not help, then look into the throat of the sick person in the sun, then that you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the bleeding, then treat it with all .i. small pincers, or fine forceps that are good for this. And if this does not work, take a shaved cane and insert it into the throat of the sick person, then insert or the tip of the cane .i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the sick person remains thirsty all day. Then take a full .i. glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the bleeding feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will fall without harming. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take 1 pot where there are burning coals, and let the bottom be covered with a thin cloth in the middle, and in that pierce the head of the instrument; then put your fumigation there, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes up to the sinuses; and the sinuses will now become runny, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and suffer the patient from thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary that it be cured by this government.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the sinuses, is, when one can see it, similar to tongs curved so as to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness from lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave behind; and see here the form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to those that remembrance comes after in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in .ij. manners which one is in its own semblance, and from that which it holds moisture. And the second manner so is for the places where they are on the body. Because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the boil is mature according to its accomplishment; and if some of them it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses that are near joints. Because when an abscess comes near a joint, and it is left as long as it is rotten within, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it causes contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it then as long as it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce an abscess ripe without complete digestion, except for the one near the foundation, so that it does not burst, and be lengthened within, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the separation of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and of the suppuration and the softening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where more depends the location of the abscess, and where it appears to bulge; and be the perforation long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no fold.
In these that are swollen, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is worth knowing that you let the perforation as long as it is confirmed in digestion completed, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, it will lengthen the body of the venom from it, and it is full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of it. And to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it behooves that you bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the core, and to cover; when it has become as one sheet, and is softened, it behooves to do as with buboes: and if there are those that are cut in three angles, and if there are those that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the angres; and if there are any where a round incision is made, and other incisions and resembling cuts.
Those who have no chief, like a superficial abscess, it behooves that you pierce it fully; and it behooves when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out one part; then plug up the abscess until the next day, then do not draw out anything directly; do this many times from great to great, until the pus is all gone; likewise if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the spirit trembles at any time with the exit of the pus, that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take care of yourself. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat incision, bring tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it behooves that you put in each one a tent so that it comes against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it back together, then it behooves that you fill it with old cotton or lint shavings without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove the dressing, and cure it with ointment as long as it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and easily, and soak one sheet, and put it on the bleeding place many times. And if the bleeding persists, then bring governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book, and if it is in winter's time, and the place where the abscess is is very nervous, then you must put on tents and sheets moistened with wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it behooves that you put on sheets moistened with water and oil, or with wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it behooves, until it is healed.
And this it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses: I have said to you how one should proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of suppurations
Of the abscesses of the head that come in small ways, and are like those in cloth, as the thorn of a flaxseed, and many resemble them. There are some fatty ones and such where there is moisture as with poultices; and there are some hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not go against it. And the work of the incision is that you suspect any instrument that is called "entromissoire," of which its form comes later, what it contains. Because if it contains moisture, they make it through from above the long one.  And when the moisture is emptied, it scrapes without leaving the skin that contains that moisture, because it returns to its place when one leaves it alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and these are those that remain from the night. And then repeat the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain of the night; then cure the wound with ointment as is suitable, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds one greasy knot, you cut it according to this form, from above; and put your fingers in there, and scrape away all sides, and place all your care to draw out the pus where it lies; and if the artery goes against you, do what I have told you afterward.  And so do with the abscess if it is stony, and of the touch and cure as I have told you.
And the incision upon the festering and moist abscess is lighter because they are of little blood. And if in some of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these i. abscesses that I cut on a woman's head; and found the abscess as a hard, rough, and white stone, and cannot break; and if one had broken any, one would have done as well a wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, for those which come at the head of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should be always at the lowest point, so that it may easily drain out the pus; and treat them as is necessary.
of scrofulous sores
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come elsewhere or on other parts of the body, and are many, and are joined with each other. And each scrofulous sore is properly within its own part, as the others and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulous sores are many. There are some that contain pus, and there are some malign ones that do not want to obey health. In those therefore that you see of good disposition at the touch, and is similar in color to the flesh, and moves from each part and is not harmful to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or to the vein, and is not deep; then it befits you to cut it from above, and to scrape it from each part, and make the two lips of the wound as one, if you have need of it, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut a nerve or a vein, and let the spatula not be too sharp nor trenching, so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far forward, lest you cut something that you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, so put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and constrain the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then examine with your index finger if there remain any small pustules, so cut them and drain them. And if in the root of the pustule vein great, so it does not behoove that you cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut the entire pustule, so it behooves that you assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, then as long as there is no superfluity remaining for the size of the pustule. So it behooves that you understand to cut the root of it, and drain further, and sew it as we have said. Those pustules that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears more; and pierce it thus as the one before stated, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well drained, cure it with ointment promoting flesh, until it is healed.
of squint
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their word.
For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the throat opening called "epiglottis" be cut; and one does not help them by this, because all the veins and arteries of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in .ij. almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles or by the amount of the slit of the knife, not in the cartilage;
and those [things] if it is suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat to the whole [area], then split the throat until it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut off the epiglottis, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that flows from the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour is passed of which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound at the heart, and close all alone with sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it be healthy.
Albucasim said one does not do this juice until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged to death, and the defect the wing. Therefore, cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the sickness has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took one knife and plunged it into her throat, and cut part of the veins of the windpipe.
And I was called by them to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that came from it, and so well that it had not pierced a vein nor been led except through the throat, and the veins were driven out through the wound.
I bandaged myself, and so I sewed the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
and there happened to the maiden that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition.
for this I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and is a great abscess in the color of a boil, and is much in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; where natural has no engine.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; And there is fear, and it does not befit to work of fire except in that which is small, and prove and search at all the introducer. If you find it as our fat, and cannot to any vein, if you cut it, as we cut the ours, and the train at all its comb, if there is any of it. And enclose well soon, and treat it as it is fitting, until it be perfectly healed.
Of ours
Many ways there are to us, which I will say all the appearances.
And therefore it behooves me to say all the difference that is between us and them.
I say that an issue is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling is not passed, and the rot is complete; therefore rest the fever and the heat.
With the other one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. a boil which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like an abscess, and becomes large;
And according to two appearances, or dry, or moist, and very colored as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the new one, that you feel and inquire first of all the instrument which is called "entromisoiro," according to its form that will come or chapter which is after.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses is that you prick or more moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then as it should be according to the size of the abscess.
then extract the entromisoiro, and take care in that which may leap out.
If moisture runs short, whatever its color, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the introduction moisture comes, know that it is fatty, so treat it in a cross, and take it with tweezers, and slightly scrape each side and guard the coat where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the needle.
And if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times.
and if it remains for a little while, and the wound pains him, apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and put on top soothing things postume hot, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those who cause flesh to grow.
and if the vein being cut is contrary or otherwise you hurry and apply the place of vitriol ground, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound purges, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cover what remains from the outside.
See here the forms of the intromittent instruments, and they are in three manners: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses with fistulas;
And they are also like needles which one sews with sorceress's clothes, and are of citrine iron, or silver, and the most valued ones are those that are yellow, and are more proven from black lead to enclose the curves of a fistula.
And they are in three ways: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and so also are there probes that have two curves in three ways as well;
and so also are there probes that have three curves, and are also in three ways; and so also are there probes that have two curves, and probes of one curve only, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these are those that are sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, for which we scrape the veins, so that one does not cut a vein or a nerve.
And of these introducers are the needles put into handles, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
and there are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and one should not use them anywhere but in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
and at times one makes, i.e., another instrument small, resembling the rind of fists, according to this form, for which one drains blood
and it is put at times in the place which heals by cutting of veins, and arteries, and at times are reopened according to this great form
At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like breasts of a woman
and remain swollen and ugly, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to be according to this form of this line b. until g.: Then scrape away the fat, and apply medicine to the wound promoting healing, then bring together the .ij. lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed
and if the mama is swollen and softened as it happens to women, then make two incisions in the two ribs above, by two similar cuts; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to the line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed;
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it dries the remaining and the grease, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous sores or boils, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, apply to the wound old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from that point on until it is healed.
And if the abscess is similar to a boil, treat it like we said in the section on cutting boils, and if the wound goes back into a pocket of pus, apply a cautery like we said before.
of the artery's rupture
When the artery is cut and the skin above is sewn together, then many times abscesses form, and it also happens to the vein that is swollen and has an abscess.
And if the one knows this concerning the artery, then the abscesses are long in formation. And when you feel it at your fingertips, that is to say, straining, and when this is concerning the vein, then it is redness appearing from afar.
And it is foolish to cover this abscess, even when it is beneath the armpits and under the arms and around the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head, it is also necessary to avoid, and in the one who is inflamed by artery by means of the skin of the long;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head, it is also necessary to avoid, and in the one who is inflamed by artery by means of the skin of the long; then work the incision as quickly as possible, and beautifully depart the artery from the webs, until it is uncovered;
then put under it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in two lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then point the place which is between the two ties with an introducer until the blood that is there flows out, and let it be cleansed the abscess;
then administer the cure that engenders a bow, as long as the limb hangs. Then cure those who are anointed with this, until they are healed.
And if the abscess is near the size of the vein, then it behooves you to seize with your hand that which you can from the abscess to all the skin. Then thrust the needle under where you hold it in your hand, and make it pierce through, and let there be 3 threads doubled, so that you draw it to the other side. then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or with a thread from one of the two parts to the two shoulders;
and if you doubt that the thread is not firm, insert another needle to all one thread below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places;
then cut the abscess until the superfluities are gone from it, then cut the superfluity of the kernel and leave what is bound together.
then put on one cloth moistened in wine and oil, then give him care of tents and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come in the nerves when they are injured, or by too much work, and similar things.
And these occur more often in the shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and these are very painful abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the body, and it is in more positions without pain;
And when one touches them gently, the patient feels pain, and it is not felt throughout the body, but below the heart;
and move well from all sides, and do not go forward or backward, nor sideways, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it might go into contraction.
and he who is on the head or forehead, make the skin to the spatula. If the abscess is small, so hold it with pliers, and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, so suspend it with the awl, and flay it, then cleanse it and stitch up the wound, and dress it until it is healed.
of large mouths hanging At no time occurs in bellies and nowhere else thelul, and is a disease that is called “fungus” because of the resemblance of it, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and very large.
And I saw  one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had fine roots, and they were slightly split, and from them flowed moisture.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6. And the work in incision is such that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of fine roots;
If the cut is at the spatula wide, and are in your presence the fire cautery. For the cutting comes often too great streams of blood, and if it does not stop you hasten then to cauterize;
and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, then take one thread of lead well made, and tie the limb as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the lead thread until it heals the limb, and through it feels no work. And if the roots are thick, have fear to cut even for the belly, but you may well cut half,
then cauterize it so it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the flesh which is of poor feeling and of a white color and has a milky appearance.
For it is an abscess that has burst open, and I will come to the treatment of this boil after.
when the head is healed
If the appearance of the boil comes from a cautery wound or cut on the side, and is on the belly and has no other boils, as they appear in other sores, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness;
and if it is from the rupture of the boil and the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess appears similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens with various discharges. And if it is for the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides it rises up, and then returns, and perhaps it is tightened, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for strong work.
And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, and does not constrain at all; and if it is for blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses thick and hard, and are filled according to a quantity.
And if it is for windiness, it is puffed up at the touch, and the works are that you look whether its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, it is necessary that you command the patient to keep his arm straight and extended, then place a bandage all around the boil. Then command him to gently move between your hands then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula. then is half of the abscess above all the great one.
Then work the half of the abscess extended on the cord, and put your index finger in it, and search inside. If you find it caught in the cord, untie it, and push the intestine out of the belly's interior;
And if you find the boil, take it with the incisions and cut away the superfluity.
And if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go well around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross as you are making it pierce.
Then restrain the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles and leave them there until they rot, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself. Or cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said.
Or cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said. and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of it as is fitting, and bind the place.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division the appearances of ulcers, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and we say that ulcers are treated carefully in marshes, and great caution is needed in their treatment, and ancients say that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped away like an ulcer which is in the armpits, and in the groin, and similar places, then one must remove it entirely when it is at its beginning; and when it is large and old, then it is not fitting for you to approach it, because I have never been able to cure any of them; nor has anyone else ever cured any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then make the patient's good place for doing the work; then scrape your oncines or ulcer, and shave it from all sides, and remove it entirely without leaving anything; and let the blood flow completely, and firmly press the place with your hand or any thing else, and if the bleeding from the wound goes against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it as long as the bleeding is extinguished; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; so it is illuminated solely; and one must not touch iron in these two appearances: namely, tympanites and hyposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicine this appearance of dropsy which is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pressing the water to the lowest part of the loin, then take the spine spatula according to this form: And let it be sharp at two parts, at the tip, and all the way through, let it not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when it is inserted, and do not let it pierce;
Then look if the dropsy is situated towards the intestines: then it is necessary that you make an incision below the breast three fingers' width to the right; and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then let the incision be on the left side of the breast three fingers' width; and if it is due to the spleen, then on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie on the incision so that superfluities do not flow to the weak place;
Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and bring it out, and raise your hand to the spatula between the skin and the syfac as when you are scraping, at the quantity of a fingernail or a little more; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the point where the water is, and this is its place, then draw out the water, and bring out this instrument for that's the form: And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and it is made of lead or lighter metal, and in the lower part there is one small hole; and on one side it has three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the pen:
At the top is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it now draws up over the instrument. Empty then half or one third part, because if you empty more than it is necessary in that hour, by chance the patient might die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death;
but in void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the heart which stops the opening that is on the syfac, because I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument again the other day, if you see the patient suffering those things, and treat of the water a small quantity;
do this no day, and keep yourself from fooling as long as it does not remain but a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him much water, so cure with burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if he remains to drink; and cure with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stopping of the penis Sometimes children are born who do not have any holes in the member, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If this happens, it should be looked at immediately and a very fine spatula should be passed through as described in this form: then put a small clo of lead into the hole, and tie it and hold it for three or four days. And when he wants to make urine, then remove the clo, and let him make urine, and then put it back; and by chance, it is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. Those whose hole is small, if they are medicated with the clo of lead as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in their place are pale, because none are born who have the hole at the head of the member, so they cannot urinate until they raise their member; and they cannot ejaculate for this reason because the matter cannot come to the end, and that is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and the head of the member and the scrotum are held as if it were the size of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should; and keep guard from bleeding which comes many times, and if it happens, then the stanchment of those who stanch blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples of the penis Many times this albature comes on the penis, and it is a bad appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant; so it behooves you to prick them with i. one fine needle, and to cut and cleanse all of them, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the albature is malignant, of putrid color and smell, so it behooves you to cauterize it with fire. When you have cut it open, and if the albature is in the head of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, so it behooves you to remove the albature that is inside first; and when it is healed, then cure the outside. For when you cure it all together, it is not certain enough that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its penis and groin; so it behooves you to shave off all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster of honey and flour that is made from the bark of pomegranates and verbena, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the flow of blood comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with two types together: that is to say, at the flow of blood, and to corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracts, then it is necessary that you put or lead a chain of wood from the penis, and urinate the patient among; and when the skin is hard at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one tool's hair, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides;
And if it is a painful thing to discuss these things, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one spatula any point of the head of the penis and of the skin; then spread well between two, and put there one fine cloth of linen moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of healing; however, when we perform this act willingly, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the easiest to heal.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they did not practice it in their law, and we have only what we acquired by experience.
Because I have seen the most part of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision with one, two, and three instruments; so they had shears because there are two blades, and by chance if one cuts above, the other remains below.
Or it is necessary to cut again, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification that is done with one tool, the point of the member is not always assured; and in the purification of the angle by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they are born so that they have no need for purification and I have seen it.
Of the modification which is made with force to the whole length of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, equally cut it in all souls tense; but that the thread be well stretched under the skin; and let the manner of the first work be so that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are doing nothing to him but tying the thread around the stick only, and then make him rejoice in every way that you can. Then make it stay straight between your hands, and respond the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the stick and blow or to the heart, and pull it up until the head of the stick is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one pock at another line; and hold it as two fingers by the second binding to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two bindings, then raise the heart upwards carefully and pull the head of the stick;
Then make it stay straight between your hands, and respond the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the stick and blow or to the heart, and pull it up until the head of the stick is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one pock at another line; and hold it as two fingers by the second binding to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two bindings, then raise the heart upwards carefully and pull the head of the stick; then let the blood correct little by little, for that is the healing; and put powder on top and on top of the powder i. a drape glued with one piece of an egg cooked unseasoned with rose water, confit with rose oil good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and cure it another cure until it is healed.
The form of the forces to the purification is this: the two shoulders should be even and sharp, and the shoulders should also be as large as the palms equally.
The error of the purification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore, it behooves you to extend it to your finger, so that the place makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut.
And if they surpass three days, and what is below the rod is swollen, let it be left until the abscess softens, and lightly scar it; if you can cut it as gently as possible, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not harm him at all.
Therefore, heal the place with things soft powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if it is cut too much, and it goes up, it will not harm it; therefore, heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Regarding the retention of urine
The retention of urine is from the lodging of stones, or blood frozen, or bowel, or raw flesh, or similar things, that we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone which is in the urethra or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent upon his knees; and their feet be placed on the back, and extend their belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient's flanks as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone upwards, for which reason the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "syringe", of which this is the form: and be it silver subtly light-headed, like the feather of a bird; and let the handle be one palm long and a half, and be subtle at the top.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie to the head one span of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
then gently put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the bud; then push the syringe forward until the bladder, and the patient feels it come to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless for those who lead or where it goes is twisted; then stretch the thread to all the wool span and span, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and make sure the urine is corrected;
and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of bladder ailments
When sores or blood come in the bladder, or rot is gathered there, and you see it distilled with sharp waters and medicines, do so to all the instrument which is called 'clepsedre', and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the tip should be such that the medicine does not leak well through it, so that the penis is stopped from addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and thrust when necessary;
And when you see to pour your medicines into the bladder, put the chief of the tube in the moisture, and draw with the drawing which is inside it; so will you draw the moisture into the tube, and then push firmly the tube back inside; so will the moisture go inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: here it is:
And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; and it goes down to one side or the place where the shoulder falls; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture with which you want to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed of a double linen thread, and heat one part of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the enema into the penis, then hold your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly through; then put one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a die, and put inside this what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a knife; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water leaps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears as if a harenet were there, and it grazes the patient's penis, and it pains them many times, and then it ends; and with many of these leaps the foundations are made; and it is light the healing of children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in the old, and it is as the middle for those who are between childhood and old age; and the cure is lighter from those who have a large stone, than from those who have a small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the bowels. For it often hinders the removal of the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate them and move them downwards so that the hip descends to the base of the bladder, and protrudes once from its place; then make him sit between your hands supported, and his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder be all declining down; then hold it and touch it with your fingers.
If you feel the hip in space, then haste now to cut above the hip. And if it does not drop at touching all, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it into its base, hold the hip, and when you feel it on your finger, pull it to the neck of the bladder; then press upward on your finger, and put it out far where you want to cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is under the scrotum in the part where one makes the incision; then put the spatula cutting, for this is its form:
And make between that which is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be right over the stone, and the two sides be even or foundation, and let the waist be travers so that it be wide outward, and inward narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large;
Perhaps the press, if the sides which are or foundation, that she leap out without work; and know that there is such a stone which has angles, and margins: so it is grieved to pass; and if it is such that is low, seeming like a glant, and round, whose issue is light.
To that one therefore where it has angles and margins, make the waist larger; and if she does not leap, then it is necessary that you extract with tongs which are also like a file at the head, to move extracting the stone so that it does not escape; or you put underneath the .i. instrument subtle curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge .i. pock the opening, and if the without decortication, then strain with vitriol;
And if there is more than one stone, first thrust the largest one to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then the path is clearer, and the smaller ones afterward if there are more. And if it is very large, it should be removed, and a larger wound made. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through where the urethra cannot close; but nonetheless force yourself to drain, or to break it with pliers, until you remove it in pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put above it one cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandages until the third day.
And when you untie it, moisten the place well with oil and water, then cure it with diafynicon ointment and basilum ointment, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and because of this urine is retained, which is known in such a manner that without jump with the urine: therefore you must put in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn it;
Then lift the wound of sharp and deep and sweet, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs together, and apply the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the shaft of the penis leads, and lodged there, and urine cannot flow; so cure him in this way as I say then, that you must cut it many times, and it is an excuse for cutting per this cure.  I have already proven this way.
Take one piece of iron according to this form and have it with three angles fixed into one stick:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the stick into the shaft gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the stick in your hand in the stone point by point, until you can feel the stone from the other side; then soon will come the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. Then it is broken, and comes out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the shaft straight towards the stone between the two ties, then extract it, and untie the threads, and clean the coagulated blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It happens that stones are found in women, and if it happens once, the cure is grievous, and it is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who unveils the marvels, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is so more deep than the stone of man, for which reason it is necessary to make deeper incisions, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows well about these things, and at pains the find one, and if you cannot find one, point to no maiden of chaste mind. Take a wife who is well versed in women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her concerning the incisions of the stone;
And look very well if the woman is a virgin: therefore it befits her to push her thigh or fundament and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she constricts it below her thigh, and she recommends that she push her thigh or con the sick one, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder forming.
If she finds it, it befits her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then copes on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the con, where it is moved apparent, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her thigh above the stone or below, and let the waist be at first small.
Then push the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so near the wound as long as the stone can possibly issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins. Know the appearances for to know the issue.
And if the stone does not yield, put ground vitriol on it, and hold it there for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is hard, and have the instruments that I told you about in extracting stones from men to help you in your work;
And if the stone does not yield, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the spot and bind it with bandages, and do not begin again those things, and leave the stone and do not touch it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the skin hardens, then return to your work as long as the stone is hard.
of fleshy hernia
Watery ramic is nothing else than a gathering of moisture or white syfac, which is below the heart of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and at times is properly in the lining of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have such a pock.
And the generation of this ramic is of weakness that comes to the testicles, and is spread that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining to yellow, or it is red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, so is the abscess reons, that is long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the ends, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, so is the abscess reons with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the ends and the white as such, one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should probe all the intromissor quarreit, for its form is beforehand. According to this then which comes after the introducer, judge of what is within.
According to this then which comes after the introducer, judge of what is within. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lie him on his back, on a thing a bit high, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left, and command the minister that he sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the sides;
then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the sides among them from the long until near to the armpit, and let your incision be completely straight by dividing the skin of the sides until the white fascia, and the skin meticulously according to your strength;
Then pierce the syringe full of water with 1 large opening, and extract all the water, and then put your bandages on, and keep the syringe above; and do not touch the heart of the onions, but only the syringe; cut all or by pieces evenly the sides of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return;
And if the  skin has fallen during your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the syringe; then assemble the 2 leaves of the heart of the onions with one seam, and then cure it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the skin corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are hanging, suspecting the flow of blood; then cut the onion to all the hanging part, and extract the skin, and cure it as we have said.
And if the liquid is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two twigs; if you cut the other part like you did the first one evenly, then wipe away the blood, and put in the wound a little bit of oil rose.
and put under the two cushions, and put blankets on top, and tie them above with all the linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and use them with wool padding according to this image, and be assembled by stitching in the crotch of the trousers, one of the shoulders rests on the foundation until the back, and the other to the armpit; and the other part over the two angles, and let the entire restraint be assembled in the buckle of the breeches;
And sometimes this cautery branch is medicated in place of a size of iron, and it is that you prick one cautery knife subtle, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be scalded as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the water is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, until you scrape everything; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and moves guarding of bleeding, and moves that the works of size;
and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess or discharge of blood or other thing, so care what makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that aquatic root is there,
if make the patient sit on .i. raised seat; then pierce the abscess below to the entire width of the spatula, and put the perforation long in the middle of the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the place and bind it, and let the remaining water drain out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
And if the white cloth does not let the water escape from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you pour into it a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrophics, for its form is before; and widen i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or as long as it takes, and when it is assembled as before, and so the patient will pass his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this branch there is more fear in many situations, so I think it's better to leave it.
and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the limbs; and this is by many cases.
That is to say, by excess of sour and sharp which is spread to the limbs, or from percussion;
and is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and finds no pain, and is a grievous abscess;
and by chance there are some abscesses grievous and dangerous, and of foul color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
When it is by our artery, then it is known by the disposition of hot abscesses, when you press it with your fingers. and it does not befit that you touch it.
That which is made from inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression with the touch of the fingers,
and one can well make a cut on this kind of thing, and on the other bones. and it is that you cut the heart of the bones, then put the head on top, and the strip of white fascia, and deliver the suspensory from all sides of the head.
If the head is already joined with these bones, then it is necessary that you pull the head and cut.
and if it is stuck to the fascia, or in those which are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that tissue and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the flesh is or its rear, so it is proper that you cut it all and extract the egg as we have said.
And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat with other dressings until it is healed.
of the boils
This is an abscess enveloped in an envelope resembling i.e. a gourd, with the softening of the boils and the patient moves sharply when he goes
and the cure for this disease is as well-prepared as the preceding one.
and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one raised seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to his knees, To all the vessels that are near the penis, and the masters of them, and they extend.
Then cut to the sharp spade wide through the veins, until they are uncovered.
And then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
Then put in an awl where there is one thread doubled, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and tie it straight to the other end; Then cut them in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted moisture;
Then cure the wound like the others where one avoids a swelling so that no vessel is leaking which nourishes one of the sides;
For by this no harm comes, and if to all the vessels comes life, it is necessary to treat the sides of all the vessels; so that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dries out and cannot be aided.
of the rupture of the shoulder The occurrence of this malady is through the section that comes at the shoulder, or the extension above the belly in the region of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the sides.
And this rupture is at the shoulder, or from the extension of it, and these 2 manners of much causes come: either from percussion, or leap, or brawl, or lifting of heavy loads, and by similar things.
And the signs when it is of the extension of the shoulder, are that there is pain and throbbing, in long time, and does not come suddenly. And is the abscess even up to the edge of the opening, because that's how the pus runs into the intestines.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the intestines, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears different under the skin near it, because of the issue of the intestine and the body coming out from the opening of the intestine.
And sometimes the intestines are pulled with the abscess, and it is held in, making great pain for the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, so one must beware of them.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its place in the wound if it can enter. Then either support it on his neck between your hands, and raise his hips;
Then extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the groin from long; Then push into the folds of the waist pins according to what you need in order to open the wound, and be such that the intestines can exit;
then scrape away the subcutaneous fat that is under the skin of the groin, until the white subcutaneous fat is uncovered on all sides
then insert your index finger into that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white subcutaneous fat that is under the skin of the buttock and between the second layer of fat
and depart that which is behind the buttock and between the second layer of fat; and then move with your right hand into the depth of the groin, and hold the white subcutaneous fat in your left hand, and lift the buttock over all the fat towards the waist; and command the assistant to extend the buttock upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament;
and ask his two sides if it has a point of the intestine enveloped or white as hard fat, and if you find any such thing, put it in the belly below;
then take a needle or one that has .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and put it in the back part of the fat, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are .iiij. threads; then assemble them one over the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the fat, which we said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong ligature of .ij. parts; then envelop the hairs of the threads, and tie them together forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, except where an abscess comes; and place it straight the thread according to the first thread long two times of that one, and after these two threads leave the of the side which is below the heart of the kidneys the large one of a finger's breadth.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the kidneys, as long as the sinews and the bow, as we have said before;
then administer wool soaked in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the thread that we have said. And no time is cauterized the white side which we have said, after the incision, for fear of a decrease of blood.
For this happens many times, and leave the thread until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
Then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this treatise I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is assembled with the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below.
then cauterize it in the middle, and treat the abscess of him who works, until the vessels are bleeding; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes comes a rupture in the bowels, as we have said, and open them; and do not send any of the intestines to the anus, and if any are sent there, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
and nonetheless if it remains too long in this point, the wound or abscess grows, as much as the intestine is sent out.
and this happens by the extension of the fascia which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and opened;
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies softly on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated from the wide according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the fascia which is under the skin that it follows, then take the iron and put it on the place appearing of the fascia;
and press at the front of the belly, then stitch the two apparent limbs of the syfac on the top of the back, and stitch one and the other;
then extract the top of the back, and do not cut of the syfac nor extend anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal hernia;
then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if it is infected, and treat the wound, until it is healed.
The syfac is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in certain men, because the sacks that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; then join the two lips with a stitch, and if you see, first sew the superfluity of the softened skin at 3 or 4 stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and cure it like other wounds, until it is healed, and pull out the thread.
of the strapping
Know that strapping is common in our law, and for this reason I would like not to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for 2 ways: one of which is that the healers know how to answer when asked about it, and they know the cure; and the other because we often need strapping of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals. I say therefore that strapping is done in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting.  In the one that we do by attraction, make your animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and pliable; then take them in your hand, as long as they are set back and you no longer feel them.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to .ij. ways as men: one if it is between the .ij. sexes appears also like the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in court the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin as a penis and .ij. sexes. And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the chars attached all, and the cure so as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the sexes, there is no cure.
of the tenting
Tenting is a char attached to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure. It befits that you singe the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest bleeding come from there, then the cure of another cure until it is healed; and to another char that is born at the mouth of the  vulva, and the clitoris, and by adventure jumps out, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "cow disease". If it befits that you cut it, as we have said the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or if it is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident by illness that has come to it; or it is caused by a char attached, or by a subtle or thick syfac, and it is made in the breasts, or on the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and knowledge of this is by the gaze of the belly. If the stopping is near appearing, if you want at your two fingers or to the groin. If it is of a subtle syfac, and it is near the two pounds, hasten, and do as follows: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, legs spread; then are the two pounds formed, until the subtle syfac is round, and the stopping is covered; then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place, and lie the woman at home each day, so that she cannot sweat. And if the syfac is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf. If the stopping is of flesh born, then suspend it to the one hand and cut it; and have blood-stopping medicines, as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with an abundance of egg; then administer a broad bandage of linen, so that the wound cannot close; and thus for a long time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed. And when in the breast comes flesh born, then it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is abscesses inflamed. For an inflamed abscess that is in the breast, one must not touch to make.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; and we have said in the division the resemblances of these, and the signs, and I will say here those that resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the hard ones, when they are brought into the marshes, and they do not appear to smell, unless it is cured by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel them, are those one can cure. It befits therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then after the hard one with pliers, and the cope into its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the light for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if blood comes out, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and peel of pomegranates and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and congeal it with honey and aisil, and make 1 plaster on her back. And if she is cured, it is good. If not, then make her suck wind-bags on the back and breasts without iron; then take wool, and wet it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and make a poultice at the place.  And when the abscess rests, cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to 1 hard lump, so it befits to cut it as I have said the hard one; and then cure it until it is healed.
abscesses of the marsh
Many ways of abscess come in the marsh, such as chancre and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, boils, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It befits therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not of the abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it.  Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die as much as possible until the pain is calmed; and then make the patient sit on 1 seat, and have 2 small seats where he reclines, and support him on his back and assemble his feet to the sides of the leg; and let his hips be spread, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good linen; then suck his belly towards the right side, and administer the instrument which is used to open the mouth of the marsh, because this comes later; and it is proper that when you want to administer this instrument, that you first push it in to know the depth of the marsh, so that what enters into the instrument does not come in too deep, nor does it hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instrument does not grieve him; and it is proper that he puts the cone of the instrument on top, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and you pull it out by hand gently, then it befits to cover the top, at the spatumile left; and when the boil is emptied, it befits that you put in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in green oil dry; and place the tent from the wound to the bottom of the marsh, and put on the marsh and above the loincloth clean linen moistened in water or malves that are cooked; then cure after 2 days of ointment following this, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the marsh and the wound by enema of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long arctium that have been cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is put back in the marsh, then it befits that you guard against cutting with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is the midwife's first duty to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see a woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air; then she hastens for the child to issue forth; then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the head first, and the second one with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly; because when it is on its head, the second one is with it, and it is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. Because it sometimes comes on its feet, and comes forth through the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes out on its belly, or behind, and is converted by chance on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
If the child comes out on its head by natural birth, and the woman is giving birth loudly, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and anoint her with oil or fennel that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs a small spatula which has this form: and cut the secondine and chop at its nail until the moisture that is inside is gone; and hold the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with fenugreek mush and sesame oil; then make her sniff and sneeze from condiment, and keep her mouth and nose for one hour: now the child will be born. And if the two hands come out, then it is necessary that you gently push them in and out; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet high up; then tip the stool to the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall when tipped; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the neck which is before placed, and remove the child, and reset it evenly.
from the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push upwards. and then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
then prick one of the feet and extend it back and forth.
He cannot jump up to his hips, if he is commanded to take, and make him sneeze from conditions; if he jumps, God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural shape. For then it is easily done.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then take a piece of alum, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and put on the surface of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make him sit upright, seated until below the ribs;
and when it is softened underneath, make him a one (?), of myrrh, and place it underneath, and let him leave for an hour; then make him sit on one (?), then make him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take his belly gently, because the child leaps now. of the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, then he puts his hands hand over hand.
from the birth of the child who comes out with one hand wide open it behooves to engineer bringing back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise, and go.
If it cannot move, then make it lie on i.e., a bed, and turn the legs outward.
Then administer the ointment that I have recounted;
And if she does not give birth, then make her sit on i.e., a chair, then study how to bring back the hand; And draw out the child according to the natural shape, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain as long as the child comes forth.
from the birth of the child on his neck, and having spread out his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother It is proper that the midwife hold her hand, then turn it back and forth, and the elbow gently.
and when it is equal, she places it on the natural muscle of her arm and oil, as we have said, then she commands her to move it back and forth.
and when you have done this, she makes her sit on one seat, and commands her to sneeze; and the girl sneezes. in this same manner to all the spine
in this same manner to all the spine When it comes to doing in this way to all the spine, so cut the spine with your finger, until the moisture is emptied;
and if the child bends on his face and on his neck, so cut from the base, that it not be held back, and kill the child;
then put the child inside, until you have placed him as is right, and command to the woman that she should not prepare at any time;
of the separation of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they can be named;
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the knife which divides them, which is tied to the handle.
And sometimes they come out as naturally as one under another, as we have said.
And if they come out roughly, then the cure as we have said, and let the bail be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make thus as it is worth to health. of many children
of many children At no time are formed in the marsh i. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii., or more up to xv., and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage,
and it behooves the bailiff to know all this, because by chance similar things happen. so that it is done according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has no accident or fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister sews the bandage into two parts, where it is attached to the bed so that it does not move during the descent of the child
then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with mucus from a plant and fennel and flax seed, then anoint her belly with these oils and mucilages. then put them in the mare lightly, then choose one place where she puts her hooves that are suitable for this
and take ward if the infant is appearing that it descends on its head; If you put the incisions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or below the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs
and if the descent is on feet, put it or prick and at the ribs middle.
and it is necessary that he holds the incision with his right hand, and puts the bend between his two fingers of his left hand, and pushes it with all his hand lightly, and put the incision in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
then insert against the other one, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are equal
and then make them equal by moving one side and the other, so that it goes smoothly, and let the pieces be toothed to hold firmly, as this is the form:
And if one part remains, oil some of its hinges with oil, and put them in that part, and pull the other part;
And if none remain, put this piece or higher its place, and do this until it all comes out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned for the constriction, if it behoves that you enclose it upon i.e., a cloth, as long as it is sore;
then cover the joint of the hand or on the knife, and thus it behoves that you do in the other hand, and as ii feet.
And if the child's shoulder is swollen and it protrudes at the end, or if it has a sharp peak assembled, if it is necessary that you put the spine spatula between your two, and make the head and draw out the water; or you take it to the instrument which is called "almidach", so that its form comes with the instruments or chapter which follows this one;
and in the same way, make it if the child has a large head naturally. and then pull the bones with pliers
and if the head leaps out and is forced back, it should be split, as long as the moisture which is there or worse issue;
and if it cannot go out, cut it in pieces as much as you can;
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the marrow is light.
And if it is in the belly or breast, then you must draw it out, that is, wrap cloth around your hand; and rub the belly or breast until the moisture inside is gone;
and if the other members are removed and the head remains, then put the bailer's hand into the midst of the marrow, and draw it up to the mouth of the marrow. Then it puts one or two, and the wood is;
And if the mouth of the abscess is narrowed by hot cautery which has come upon it, then it does not need to be worked; but rather administer moist and fatty things; and administer plasters, and soak in softening and moisturizing water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, so administer what we have said in the living child;
and if one has no power over it, then treat him by pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, if it comes to an abscess in the marsh, administer what we have said concerning abscesses that come in the marsh;
and if the discharge of blood comes, then put it in a binding that holds it back, and administer other treatments to him.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one fetus had been killed, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death the other. After long time there came an abscess in the belly, and it inflamed so that it opened, and began with great pus discharge.
I was called to the cure, and I pondered long, and could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days another. I was much astonished, because this one whose belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to probe the wound, and in tracing my hands along the bones, as long as the woman was better off and lived the woman for a long time thus, and it was always there a bit of bulge from that place;
and I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when the masters find a strange thing, that they may know how to help.
how to bring the bone back to its place
Here after comes the form of the pressor, which we have in the books; and to 2 turns of 2 bones of the 2 limbs. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be i.e., two of wide, and the edge of the trees i.e., must, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two limbs be two adjustments of this same shaft, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm in length or one pock more;
and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, in its likeness more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony shaft or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers; and have two joints two attachments, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the womb with all the instrument, so have the woman sit on one bed, her feet apart and her legs open, then put the two attachments together in the womb, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with all the instrument, as you have done with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the womb, until the patient does what she wants.
This instrument are all surmounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the mirrors have shown them, so much more hasty is the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument that you do not have it displayed, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the secondine is retained in childbirth, it behooves you to command the woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with condition, and restrain her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps for that, well is.
If this is not the case, take one pot and make one hole or cover, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
All these herbs, or none of them, be boiled or cooked in water over the fire; then put one end of the rope or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh.
And leave it there until the vapors come out into the marsh; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If the secondine jumps suddenly. And if it remains after this cure and is not better, as he commands to the wife that she moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in ointment of aloe, and then puts it into the wound,
and desires the second time; and when she has found it, she grasps it and stretches it little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not fall out during extraction; but it must be moved gently to right and left, and then pulled; if it comes and unsheaths itself.
And if the mouth of the marrow is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not of all those things that we have said, then keep that you do not use to the milking.
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the mare, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then enema her with ointment tetrapharmacon;
if she will bear it and return, and come forward; but nonetheless, when she bears it, it comes evil smelling to the stomach and head, and pales the patient.
Therefore, it is necessary fumigations suitable to those things: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of the flowers and the second is this:
And it is like a cane in appearance, and one puts the head fine into the natural [part], and the shoulders wide above the fire;
And let the fumigation be on coals, and the rope as long as it is burnt, and begin another.
to examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by some subtle sifac: So it befits the midwife that she pierce that sifac at its proper place, and do not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the opening so that it does not touch;
then put upon it linen dipped in wine and oil, then the ointment's cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it does not close up, then put upon the opening a piece of plantain, and leave it for several days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this stupefaction comes from the tightening of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that tightening; if it is cured, as we have said about the cauterization of lead.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are more nodular, and larger than those that come from near the outer foundation, or in the space between the two parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and still has moisture, bringing white pus or subtle boils,
And sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who have them or by excretion or ventilation when the patient defecates, and perhaps some jump out.
And if the fistulas pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the junction of the hip, and up to the buttock.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the foundation, and not piercing: And it is that you put your two index fingers or foundation, and put a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twist, so you put a tent of fine felt, or one hair of horse, as long as you feel the tent or the hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come by purging or wind or humors, as we have said; know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urethra, if it spurts urine and cannot be closed by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes to that place. If there is no twisting and the pain is in the surroundings, then it is that he has a bow there, and there is no ointment or medicine worth its use.
And in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and the vanity of foolish miracles that intervene.
In those which are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of iron or lead if there is a twist, as far as you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the base, then it is necessary that you put your index finger in it
and feel that the tent has pierced it; and whether discovered or not you feel between your finger the bone or the flesh, then you know that it is passed; if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
One says however, that one can heal none well, but this happens rarely.
and the aid one makes to it, if one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. and bring it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred strands, which resemble an eye feather, are burned.
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that char is wet, then the cure of ointment tightening flesh and joining.
If it is thus healed, it is well. If this one, otherwise cannot be healed;
and if the tent goes in and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or pus, and you see the fistula after the covering of the heart; if you cover the beginning of the fistula, and push it forward before the tent, and then the cautery after, as long as it comes to the top of the tent;
And will be delivered the tent, and will fall; then defie those hairs that seem a feather of bird, and remains nothing.
And if the sore goes forth, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery gathers two good things: namely, the burning of those hairs joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure with damp tents in butter or crushed herbs, until it [the wound] lies low, and there are the burnt hairs in the bottom;
then cure the wound of the eye openings with firm, enduring flesh, and are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes as far as to the bottom of the foundation, and is moved away from the body, then you put your finger or foundation in it and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent and between two is the tissue or the syphons or chars, where it is close to piercing, then there is no other way than by faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put a tent and care for it as first;
and do not go too deep in making it, that you do not cut the tenement that holds the foundation, and let the excretions come by the sense of its will; then care for it, as we have said;
then care for it, as we have said; by adventure if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the mundus once it is cut from the foundation, or by tent or other pointed instrument; then remove carefully the flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation; this is easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are in this manner: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is or lies against the foundation near the skin above. If you take a tent perforated at the top according to this form: And he puts one twisted thread into two, and puts the tent on all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is pushed into the margin of the foundation inside, then withdraw the thread from that one lost, just as you put your own on the foundation.
and tie the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold them to each other, and let it be one or two days.
and restrain it every time, until the threads close those spaces which are between the two, and heal.
then cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it is not proper to make a cut covering it if it is too deeply embedded, and then cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spatula which one makes a fistula with is very sharp on one side and cutting. and on the other hand no, for this one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways: or they are within the fundament, as much as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are outside have less moisture,
and moreover towards where a drop of citrine water or a drop of blood, and have the color of the body;
and the cure of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch so that he go into chambers, as long as the foundations are healing, and the threads appear; if you hurry, and can hold it with tweezers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with one draping cloth, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and hold them to your thighs, then cut them, and put hot powders on top in place of the cautery. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the base cannot exit, then give the patient a harsh and biting enema to wash out what is at the base so that it can exit openly.
and if the patient does not complain, and if the thread is felt to be firm from the base, then the treatment is light. And it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until it is healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then thread the thread on top and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same for all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood;
then put on the foundation one bandage moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and put it on top of the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
and then let it so until they fall off, and when they are fallen, treat them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
dry the drying of the veins or foundation Many times there is dryness of veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is no use.
Then it behooves you to scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark above, so that it does not become moist. then care for it until it is healed as it should
and if it cannot heal, begin shaving again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scraped then care for it until it is healed
about trembling An ant is a small appearance made before the body, and goes much by itself.
And at times it finds him cold, and one feels it also like dead from shivering, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a feather of an goose, or a feather of a strong vulture, and put that feather on the shivering, until the circles purple the shivering all around. Then turn your hand on the whole feather until you cover all around the shivering, and put it in by itself, and scrape the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, so do this of a canine of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
Do not pierce it too deeply, for to keep hold of the two, and move pressing. And if you see, so cauterize the furrow, as it is in front or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clister. At no time is a clister made of silver or lead, or iron melted or woven; and at no time are these instruments made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those therefore whom one administers in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large as it is above wide, where the belly is tied according to this manner.
And it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside. And on one side two holes are made, and on the other one.
And it is the belly where one puts the medicines of an animal bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes.
and between each opening there should be a space, then put in these openings one strong thread of twisted silk in ten or as much as it entwines, and assemble the belly like it is a sheep. and when the medicine is inside, then the string in front of the instrument is tied with a strong thread, then it is cleaned out; and that's the form of the circle.
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently.
then squeeze the instrument with your two hands together, until it is all out, then take out the enema, and lift the patient's legs apart.
and if the medicine wishes to work well, let it spread as much as possible; and if it rests one night completely, then it is greater help.
And if you enema it in illness of a falling belly, and the medicine hastens to work, then restart it until he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base or an abscess, then make the enema as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and cutting of sword and knife, or of spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if you take care that it is of stone or similar things, and the skin is all together torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the presence of a hot abscess: if it becomes feverish soon from the head itself, even if it comes little blood from the wound, and the bleeding is in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
and avoid the patient’s repletion of wine and fatty meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be lessened, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes to it, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in wine stich.
and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, a powder that I will say a little later.
And if the art has moved it, put some ointment on it, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with tents, then bring them together by sewing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and hangs, and holds only by a point, then cut it away; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat thick meats, such as testes and cooked grain, also poultry, and similar things.
And if you find oneself or skin rot, and it does not reach the bone, so cut the rotten all, and throw it far, then treat;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put into this powder which unites as if the fire had moved them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely. And apply it to the wound, and hold it firm, until it dries well and joins with all its blood;
and then bind it well, and leave it unbandaged if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one lacks incense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has not cauterized the wound.
And if the wound has healed the same as before, then do not put this powder on it.
But put on some ointment of digested roots, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it is better. Then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers.
and I will tell you afterward about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and don't put anything restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled water also in sweet water. and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, so sew it and bind it with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is capped and full of bowel, pierce or lower than there;
And if the artery is cut and blood flow comes, then stop it, and tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduit is kept, because the flesh goes. Then sew the heart on the chain of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural form. And then the strain is applied, and it is left for a few days, then it is treated with dressings until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so it shall be; And if there are fragments of bone, then treat them all as you can. And those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound heals. and be sure to remove and align the edges.
and if the wound is fresh, apply powder on top of the powder I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of a sword or spear wound
If it is a wound from a spear or sword, and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there comes wind, which the patient feels; know then that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put any powder to it at the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not stagnate. and return to the heart, and touch the patient; but put attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day;
and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture;
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor bad trembling of the heart nor twitchings of the arm; and when you see the good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with tents and other dressings, as long as it is healing;
and if it cannot heal, and work, afterward know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, so treat it as that which is in front;
if it is large, suture it; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is deep into the bone, and has broken pieces, then cleanse the wound, and remove the fragments if they are loose; and if they are not loose, leave the wound to rot, it will lighten the extractions;
and of other wounds as other members is the judgment as we have said.
of the belly's derangement
The derangements of the belly are great and medium and small;
Of the great wound no time does the intestine or the nerve of the intestines leap out, by which the introduction of others;
and the suture is more painful, and sometimes worse is a small wound than a large one.
for this reason, one puts back the intestines in, if one does not put them back carefully and gently; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they enter more difficultly.
and for this reason, it is better to heal the small wound because for this reason one resets the intestines to their place like the other two.
And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
and nevertheless they are more appropriate with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has emerged, and something else is to put back, then it is by one of the two ways: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Half a sponge or a soft cloth in hot water only, or you cook in hot water with quinine and cypress and spice, and apply the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this thing is done restraining it, and is moved so that it becomes smaller.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or wine and let them be cooked. For by this it is aligned the entrance to little things.
And if it cannot enter, then make an opening in the wound with the instrument that one uses to remove hemorrhoids.
and the first cure is to move the hip that we should not cut into it without great necessity.
and this is the instrument to split it:
if it is cut inward at the bend and not outward, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps out if you put it back in its natural place. If you have the power to do so, because this is good for healing.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you set your mind to what the sunken part being higher than the other.
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds, apply what has appeared to you,
Then take between your hands  i. minister piteous who holds all the ruin in his hand and assembles the lips; And this is the common manner of suturing,
And this is the common manner of suturing, and that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then let from the head of the wound i.e., a space, and there put a needle where it has i. a good strong thread; and pierce the two chiefs of the skin with the two chiefs of the shaft,
then the straining of a doubled thread around the needle of two parts then assemble the two heads of the wound together
and then leave one finger's width of space, and insert another needle there; then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you have need of needles. as long as all the wounds are restrained;
and the needles are moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones do not penetrate well: for this reason they ought to be shortened
and it is not fitting to thrust the needles too far from the flesh and skin
so that they do not pierce and open the wound before the suture;
and then cut the points of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the shoulder of the needles to hold them and let them until the wound is healed;
and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one needle or two are inserted;
The second suture is so common, and it is that you join the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the cheek together with a needle on which there is one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four bones together,
and when you will have pierced these four bones together, then pull the needle to the part where you began, in the manner in which one sews cloth;
and put a space between each suture the thickness of one man's finger;
This suture seven men,
and I sutured a wound that one man had on his belly,
that was slashed with a knife, and was the wound more than a palm wide, and were intestines well two palms wide,
and was the wound in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been for 24 hours.
and the wound was sutured up to the 15th day, and I treated it, and it was healed.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and I applied half a handful of old cotton to the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until it was healed.
Or I shall tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and thrust it from the outer part to the inner.
When it has pierced the flesh straight on, lay the point down upon the skin or suture where you thrust the needle.
And make it pierce from the other side, from the inner to the outer.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the furrier does the furs and that you leave once the raw edge of one side, and take it back of the other, as long as the stitching is entirely completed.
The second manner of stitching, which Galens states properly
is as any one does, who gathers the two parts together naturally and apply one of the heads of the staff to the other head, in such a manner:
Insert an awl or head of the miraculous mirr near, and make him feel only that part. and leave the two heads of the staff; then turn the awl and make him feel it from the outer part to the inner one, as the two shoulders;
then have each of them examined from the outer part to the inner one, in two other shoulders which are on the other side;
and this is the most common way of suturing and the most usual.
The Gauls say this word, and no one testifies to it,
one must stitch the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each
and one should insert one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the suture is more difficult than the others of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the artery has moved, so put back the intestine, and sew it up; then place on top a powder of crushed charcoal,
so put back the intestine, and sew it up; then place on top a powder of crushed charcoal, and if the artery has moved, put on top any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and stitch the thread, and join the fascia, and the mirach. then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed;
and if you lack medicines, place upon it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Because you do not need other medicines in multiple positions as long as the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make unity with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of temper, or in rose oil, and place it around the edges, and under the buttocks;
and if he feels pain or rot in his bowels, and many times it happens if they cleanse him with black wine enemas, and likewise if the rot comes as far as the intestine;
and he pierces it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jeune" cannot heal when it is rotted and it is because of the position of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back in as if it were the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has become wormy or black, then you must tie the part that is black so that no blood flows from it; because there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the ligament and put the two heads hanging from under the part of the wound until outside to align the extraction when the bone falls, and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some men,
because I have seen that a man was pierced or belly by an arrow;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and through it there were evacuations and wind;
I made a cure according to what I could, and did not cease to treat until he was healed, and the bones were joined.
And when I saw him joined, I doubted that the patient had evil in his belly; and there was no evil, but he remained in better disposition, eating and drinking;
and some experimentors said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in such manner: Take fresh threads to large test, then assemble the lips of the wound. And when the thread has covered the mouth, so it lays upon the two lips,
Then put one other bandage after in that same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered.
and cover the wound. If the chief  inflames in the intestine, and no inconvenience comes to the patient,
and if one can bind the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner take the head of this intestinal thread that is well cleaned. and then tie to the head of this thread, i.e., a thread of fine twisted linen, then put the thread in the needle and sew up the intestine, and pull it tight at the rupture;
and this manner of suturing with threads is not worse than according to the way of fiancé and hope.
and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the internal groins, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula". and even when it is pulled back and bent.
And a fistula is according to truth a hardened and white knot, where one does not feel pain, and is also pulled back like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and bent over, and sometimes thick; Sometimes much, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the small amount of blood or flesh; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside it, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; where there is too much swelling; or the tissue is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; when the medicine is not good in the cure or because the corruption is manner of pestilence or because the property in the region is late digestion, and slow healing, and swollen by nature or there are veins or bones
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
So it is necessary that I teach you the cure of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula happens in all members of the body; For there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the sides. or to the backbone of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to where I have said, and you are confident in the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if it curves;
and if the fistula is crooked, then surround it with a subtle tent of cloth. for lead bends and molds itself to the tortuosity;
and if the fistula is opened by hand and you cannot close it well with tents, then insert a clyster through one of the openings,
for moisture flows from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then carefully probe with your finger to know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is covered by membrane;
and ask the patient well of the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it;
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or a vein, or in any of those places that I have told you, if the blow according to what I have told you,
or in any of those places that I have told you, if the blow according to what I have told you, and bone has been broken and the cartilages corrupted that are within; and then the care until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep well from right place, so it behoves that you cut it as deep as you can, then put in moist cloths in the medicine of water, and drive them up to the head of the fistula,
then put in moist cloths in the medicine of water, and drive them up to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity which is staying at the bottom;
and then I put ointment in healing skin, as long as it is healthy;
and if it is not healthy by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it. If a vein or nerve strikes or grazes principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the king as much as the corruption is removed then cure with things that generate flesh until it is healthy.
and if it is not healed, and returns concave like before, know that you have not gone to the end yet:
If you discover and desire as long as you are at the bottom and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is good. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there is no other thing than to let nature do;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with tweezers, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, draw them all out, leaving none behind;
and if moisture does oppose you, and there is no error or fear, if it copes and moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something preventing rot, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and therefore they will have more easily bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you remove only so much corruption until all blackness is gone, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of it corrupted, and comes to the flesh of the bone. if it must be cleaned and covered all the way to the corruption, and then it is cured until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was one youth about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body.
as long as the matters came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause to open.
but the surgeon through their folly opened it so much that the abscess opened. and they oozed out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of pus that flowed and was damp and from the body;
and many a wonder they put care for two years, and there is no wise man in the art of hands
until I came to be called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and those that were running through the holes in great quantities; and became red the body of the youth, and had a yellow color.
I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I then pushed, and dug into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the inside bone;
I was the one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, except for the one that I removed;
and began to restore the wound with medicines that are soft for long periods, and it could not close;
and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then I removed it, and I tried to close the opening;
but I could not so much as I placed my palm upon the bone, and the traitor forced it to its whole length. then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and joined soundly.
and it no longer needed to be started again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure. and for the fear of death that I had of him. For blood evacuation often happens, but it was healed entirely
For blood evacuation often happens, but it was healed entirely and in the place of the bone, a hard cartilage grew, and was of good disposition and had no inconvenience or contrary in all things, neither in going nor coming.
and extend the head so that you draw the corrupt flesh outward, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to be sure, so that the skin does not blanch the flesh; and put one brand or a board under the bone so as to cover the rotten flesh and it is necessary to be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be again another time.
And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part then uncover all the flesh; then put one brand under
and then let it be from one part to the other the corruption, and let the linen thread of the corruption be long, as we have said.
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and let the bone where it contains be from the other side.
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to cut.
and if the corruption is at the finger of the hand or the finger of the foot, then it is a very strong thing. but nonetheless, it is necessary that you inquire about that corruption, how it opens to you. and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not make you contrary.
and know that the cutting instruments and the threads for closing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them. and their thickness and their slenderness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each type of work its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to that which it befits.
of fire The shoulder can dislocate due to internal or external causes;
and when you have treated that corrosion with medications and they are of no benefit, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by these of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes by these of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb from limb, and takes hold throughout the body; if you hasten to cover,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar
if the corrosion is at the top of the back, then cover it, and do not give him any space to come until the hand
And if it comes until the hand, then cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no value of treatment beyond the quantity of its virtue.
And thus do as much as when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint.
and if it comes or pierces, cut the whole piercing. And if it goes up into the leg, cut at the knee joint.
And if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
And the manner of covering or supporting the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister to the lower bandage, and another minister to the upper bandage. And you should loosen the cloth that is between the two bandages by one span wide, so that the bone is uncovered;
then cover it or cloth it, and put on each side one drapery of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place and come to the patient another lesion and abscess shoes.
And if bleeding comes when you operate, cauterize the place thoroughly, or where you put any restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed,
Then tie the member wounded with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corrosion came first in the heel of his foot, until it consumed the whole foot.
And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and was healed.
And long afterward it returned the corrosion where the hand is, and he came to me,
and I put on him things punctional after the cleansing of the body, and could not cease the corrosion;
and he begged me to cover his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of punctioning the matter; and fear also that if he cuts his hand, he will not die. because the virtues of the man were weak; and he despaired of everything, and returned to his land, and hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have this tale for no other reason than that one might do otherwise if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a head in its fleshy place, and it lasts so long that it causes a great gathering of matter. And then it bursts and pierces, and the matter flows out, and the place remains hollow, like a vessel. And the skin that is on top is as thin as one fine linen cloth, and does not reach down to the bone or the nerve, and such a sickness is called "sain,"
but if it is so elongated that it comes up to the bone by its end, then it is called "fistula";
and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thinned out, just like a sheet of cloth; and it does not hurt from its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin tightens, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster thus:
look if the breasts are large, and the bowels that are within them have a foul odor, then administer a clyster of Egyptian medicine which is made thus: Take there then, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire Until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in clysters the groin, and restrain the opening; and let the medicine rest for 2 hours, then remove it by pressing.
do this many times, until the swelling is diminished, and the fear is removed;
and at no time are they to be cleaned with water of ashes. when this medicine is not present, and you take ash from grapevine wood, and pour water on it,
Then cleanse it, and apply a clyster, until you know the bowels are well cleansed.
And if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey or a bit of litharge ground. or you can clysterize with honey and sweet wine, as honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and wine makes flesh dry;
and when you have done this, and you have faith that the chest is well purified, if the clyster of those that makes flesh born in it,
and is that you prepare plaster definitive, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you sterilize it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have discussed the properties or treating ointments;
and if the opening of the breast is small, and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter there, then widen it with iron a bit, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basil ointment, as long as it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so the cloth and let it alone as much as only where the clyster can enter
and if the opening that lies above is lower, so cover or below where it is. For when the  bowel is in proper position, do not let anything enter it; and if you cannot cover the chest below as you see; If it is prepared in such a manner that the bow goes to its lowest place that it is.
and if you cannot cover the chest as you wish, if it is prepared in such a manner: that the bow goes lightly downward, and nothing of the bow remains; and take medicines to solidify for placing on the chest
and be above that is a cloth of linen that covers all of the chest. then cover with force on the opening of the chest that is one finger wider than the first Then place ointment over another cloth according to the quantity of the opening and place it on the hole of the breast to align the rib, and do not remove the large sheet outside until after many days once.
and the one who is out of the hole of the breast, is often removed to take out the rib, and know what comes from the rib, if it's venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine is spread in such a manner and you see the nature that leaps upon the pit of the chest, if you know that the breast will be healed soon, and approach health;
and then unbind it in the morning, or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, if you change one other cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bent badly after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle poisons act after a long time, then do not despair of health.
for health approaches. For there are men whose injuries heal slowly in their wounds, and some who do the opposite;
and if it lies bent badly from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
and if the breasts take long to heal, and are swollen, apply drying medicines in substance and drying in virtue, like diaphinit ointment, because it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the last remedy;
take diaphinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the ash of old wine equal in substance;
then congeal it and use it; and the same thing made honey boiled and mixed, when inflammation is defined
or you take mire and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire; and then in glue one cloth, and place it on the chest, and at no time administer one long rod and roots of lilies celestial, which is also like flour from violets and centaury;
and roots of lilies celestial, which is also like flour from violets and centaury; And in use of simples or of compounds: grind them, and make a powder of it, and put upon the honey that I have said, and use it. And if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment,
And if the wound is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, Then know that the corruption has become deep, and makes impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the treatment of fistula, as we have said above.
of the abscess of the angle
A boil is an abscess that arises below the fingernail of the hand. or of the foot, or by chance it arises in other places;
and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then comes another abscess. and they will grow and push the root of the bone, and perhaps even break all of it.
and the corrosion comes to the bone, until there is pain and a foul smell, and the shoulder is very wide, and its color is dull.
When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help at all, then it is necessary that you cut to it with an iron tool all the superfluous tissue which has grown around the bone, then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy.
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and begins to prick, and the blemish, then it is necessary that you put a little lead under the nail that pricks the flesh, And the point at the top, and cut this carefully and lightly and put on the remaining part of the medicine ardent and corrosive to remove all.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it further, for as long as the bone is corrupt there, it cannot heal;
And if you see the two bones are broken, cut it in 1 part as has been said before. then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is broken and bruised, and it feels great pain, then you must first set it right; then cut the angle of the spatula with a sharp blade by cutting across from above,
and guard that the knife does not come to the flesh which is under the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is some where it has bones, and sometimes there is a nail,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in none of us of the two. He who is born in neither of the two does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance moves.
The waist of one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure; so hold him to be cut.
In one who is born or goes out at the rear end, you should first cut away the flesh around it to the bone, Then set the bone with a suitable bandage for it, then treat it until it is healed.
The sutures that come to the two together come by birth, or by joining of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you set those sutures so that the parts rejoin according to their natural forms; then place between them two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not adhere. or you put between two pieces of subtly plank, until the bones are joined, as it is fitting.
When joining comes to none of its two with the palm, so join that joint as it is fitting.
Of evil
The veins are thick and wrapped in full of melancholy superfluities, that come into more members of the body.
And more often happens in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging with coles, and then the salve of the basilica.
The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is by means of the cup, and then drawing out the black blood. and the other manner is that you open the vein and draw all its blood completely.
The waist is thus according to this manner: first raise the leg of hot water very strongly, until the large sinew be softened. then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, of a wide size,
then lift and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much sinew as the virtue of the patient can suffer.
and then the wound, and instruct him to stay covered with black pitch.
And begin again the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harmful to the patient.
The elevation of the leg for the patient is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put him in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, then heat it by fire, and then apply it to the vein from the knee to the elbow, or in the part below the ankle.
then work the leather at the incision, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the leather it seems like a white cord.
then push the point below, as long as it is lifted from the leather, and then lay it gently on the incision.
then place it in one other location above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it is open, then raise it to its root, as you have done, and place it on another needle, as you did first.
Then take another size, or more if you need them, then raise it, and place it at the two points of the foot,
then pull and raise it until the second size; then extract it from size to size until it is all pulled out, then place it.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then insert a needle into it of very strong double thread, and tie and draw it, and insert below the head of the thread, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out; and guard that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out nor lift it, and it comes to the patient's annoyance;
and when you have it entirely drawn out, place on the wound's location wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if it is necessary that you break it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you break it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to cut the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of large curvature, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees are born, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it can be found elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from beneath the skin,
as it comes from within the body of serpents and worms,  being located between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the veins change, and the vein begins to issue forth, as if a root of a plant.
When the shoulder is open, then it behooves you to envelope around a piece of plank from three and a half up to two and a half inches, and the knot
and leave the plank while attached to the leg, and every time that it comes in contact with the fire, then you enclose around the plank, and the knot and if it is too long, so cut a part of it, and wrap the remaining, and do not cut it at its root, until it be all out; for if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and rotting there, and bad sickness;
for this reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remain on the body;
and sometimes this vein when it is treated is of five palms long, or of ten, And one man came to me once, who had it come out 10 palms long, and when you cut it, it throws out 1 spear or hole, and it pierces to the bottom,
so that all of it comes out; and empty the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then treat it like abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein many wounds, and also when it opens in the ankle or foot, and from which much blood flows out, and because of which pus flows; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms which are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land “ox disease,” because it happens many times to oxen,
and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the end of limb to limb, as long as they break the skin where it goes, and jumps out.
and is caused by rotting of certain humors, such as those that come from worms and lice and roundworms in the belly;
and one doubts its malignancy, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and treated, if one can only flee when it goes:
so it is necessary therefore that you tie the place above and below with a strong linen bandage tightly
then cut above it and remove the wound, and if the bone is embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or chief near the eye, then restrain below him the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and the treatment force;
and it is necessary to use the patient's purification of body of medicine dissolvers for the corrupt humors,
and if worse from meats inciting rotting.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and after that, I saw it rise as a worm toward the shoulder, More quickly than any thing, just as living silver when it moves from its place to another.
The pain departs from that place and goes into the shoulder.
And then a little after it corrodes throughout the whole body, until it comes to the other arm.
Then she told me that it returned again all around her body, as I saw it.
I was greatly amazed how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner. However, I had seen many who well had the pain move from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this, as I saw in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and for this reason appears that constraint of windiness;
and do not appear in accordance with this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the swelling above and below is evenly distributed, and then cut until that constraint of windiness in its place is gone; And cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who expel wind, such as foul pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similar ones.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they enter.
The variety of them is that some have large points, and small, and hairy, and smooth. and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces; and those which fall in any member if they fall according to two manners: or in the principal member it falls
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you after, appear to you: then it is necessary that you take care in the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many cases. and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is above the brain, is when there is a darkness and stiffness and turning inwards and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of mind, and vomiting of phlegm. and perhaps it is without power in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and jumps from the wound moisture white seeming to pus, and jumps also as if burning of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not yet in;
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near to the left breast, and it feels as if it were tied in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves also like the foot, and in a short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: Know then without doubt that death is near.
And the sign of the seventh that does not move its body is that without pains of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns color, and gasps loudly and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls in the covering of the breast, it is near the ribs; and he feels great pain and great sorrow and sighs; and he moves all the members from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls in the stomach, by chance it throws out of the wound some thing of undigested flesh.
And if the arrow falls in the belly, and through the intestinal rout it throws out a piece of fiber, there is no hope for cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls in the bladder, and the urine comes out mixed with it, and the patient feels great pain; know that the wound is mortal.
The other member, as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the auxiliary and the spine of the back and the thigh and the hip and the legs, and the seeming members, are safe according to more dispostitions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason that you do it otherwise.
It happened to one man with an arrow falling into the root of the nose: I probed it and drew it out on the other side under the fat of the ear, and was healed without feeling any pain.
And treat with a game an arrow that it fell into the fat of the eye under the paper and the arrow was returned, and I could not reach anything except the tip towards the shaft and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, to one and a half [measures] light without ears; the game was safe, and it did not cause him any bad accidents
And treat an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
I became the barbs, and I skillfully treated until it healed, and it was cured for the Christians.
And I treated an arrow in one man, who had it in his belly, and I thought he would die;
and then after he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut into the arrow, and I removed it, and I treated the wound, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man who has an arrow that fell out or on his back, and the wound was stitched up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change its natural position, nor is there any disturbance in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was stitched up;
and remains so enduring great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in the king, who was lodged among his ribs, and was a little inclining to the right side; and the arrow was entirely pulled out
I was summoned for treatment after three days had passed. I found the wound very tight.
I felt it with all a fine tent, and did not feel it at all. And he felt a prickling and pain below his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on its place a poultice atractive and digestive, because the  it did not swell. and appeared to me the place of the arrow.
and appeared to me the place of the arrow. I put the plaster on right away, and closed the wound straight up, and left the patient like that for a long time.
until he felt the arrow still inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a medicine acrid corrosive by hand immediately, until it was open.
and feel it, and feel the head of the arrow which is reddening at its place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
and it pierced well the ends for .iiij. months,
and then I enlarged so the wound that I put in the tongs, and mine on one side and on the other, and it could not issue forth;
Therefore do not cease to subtly work and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day tongs well made, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter, until I worked with it and restored the wound.
And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was soldered, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on those that I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend all;
but the wise masters compare by good measure and by what is present and lacking. find new works and nine instruments, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not lodged in the limbs where they are fixed except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which shoots farther than where it enters is an arrow lodged in the flesh, and never shot out again now.
And if it does not shoot now, leave it as long as the flesh is bruised and sore, and let the exit be clean;
And also if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot move out, then leave it thus for some days, and move it every day.
And then if it jumps, and if it does not jump, then pierce around it to all. i.e., forest subtly, until the skin around it is spread out, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back into its place in the body if it cannot be seen, then search for it with all your might. And if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the width of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, or nerve, or vein, then cut as wide as the wound; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at the point where it is held
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at the point where it is held if bone is removed that is stuck in two parts as much as you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out and carefully that you do not break the arrow, but rather draw it out more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then place it until its end is softened, then treat it, for the extraction hurts less. And if the flow of blood makes you contrary, then administer what we have said about its treatment in this chapter.
and guard against the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and put any way you can remove the arrow without peril,
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow fell into him, because it is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that spot if one sees or feels it apparently:
Cut therefore above, as long as the tongs can take hold, and then extract it; if it jumps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot be pulled out, leave it there for now, and then begin pulling again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still inside, pull out the entire shaft.
And if the shaft has broken off, and you see fit to administer treatment, then administer one pointed instrument. So that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then pull it out.
and if the arrow is lodged, put one instrument with a pointed tip into it, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded by flesh, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow strikes in the chest or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cut into it, then cut into it;
and guard yourself from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if need be. and care for it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows are similar to an eye's beak, and see here the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body. Of veins from which one is healed there are thirty-one, of those it has or head sixteen.
That is to say: two veins that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbaches"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspirates"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the root of the nose. and the two veins that are on the neck. and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augered". and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which one commonly heals are five in each arm
One is cephalic and is on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; And the middle one is called "fast," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly" among the common people, and it is on the fossa. and it is the one that one cleanses, which opens manifestly on the pouch.
And the sap vein is the vein that is between the index and ring finger, and so it has two veins.
And in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one of them is under the curve of the pouch of the left side. and the second saphenous vein which is in the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "ness", which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg are three veins below those.
The saphenous vein that is after the ears so helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of the saine [blood], as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the saine [blood], as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: then grasp with your hand and where you feel the pulse below your back, tighten it up;
then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand to pull the entire vein upwards, and cover and the skin and the vein well two times through, and make blood issue as much as you see
then restrain it and bind it, as long as it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for an old headache, and suddenly, and habitually ophthalmia, and to the body of the tears sharp eyes;
and the qualities of the blood are as I said: and that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulse beneath his throat, and then judges by it;
then gently lift the heart above the vein towards your right index finger, and put the lancet below. and lift the vein upwards, and the cup, just as you have done in the other two veins, and make a correction of blood according to your need.
then untie the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top.
and then tie the wound and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their binding and their extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The blood of the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the blood of the cephalic for illnesses of the face old, and to migraine, and to redness.
and its quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "foser," whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and press down with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never work with a wide flame.
However, it is not right that the flames be too large; and  the vein should not be treated crookedly, because the bone is near, and by chance the flames will break the vein when it is thin.
The vein of the two veins that are in two temples helps the eyes, and to the temple, and to the cheekbone, and to the root of the eye, and to diseases of the face;
And the qualities of their veins are that the patient stretches their neck by twisting with any linen, as before;
Then the healthy, and let it be healed through the length of the flame a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks; then do a correction of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it with cloth, and bind it well.
The opening of the vein in the groin is good for fevers, and for sudden illnesses, and for diseases of the face. such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and even when it is old.
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose with your left hand and takes a subtle long flame and inserts it into the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well until now, and the blood will begin to flow now.
and do not let it bleed too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up at night, because it is very quickly restored.
The sap of the two guindeges helps in the treatment of the spleen, and the beginning of melancholy, and many diseases, and gout, and leprosy, and herpes, and scabies;
and the qualities of the sap are that the patient extracts his neck under both, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on one seat,
then heal the vein of the long one a little widely, then draw blood moderately, or as much is necessary;
then do the other part in the other vein, then untie the linen, and hold both veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be until morning, so that the wound is healed.
Of healing the veins The bloodletting of the veins of the lips above helps in ulcers in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and for toothaches and swelling.
And the qualities of bloodletting is to make the patient sit in front of you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: Therefore handle both carefully, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt,
Therefore handle both carefully, and if you do not know them, and are in doubt, if handle the larger one of each side, and also make .ij. veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The vein below the tongue, when bled after the cephalic vein, helps with  the constriction of the throat, and with diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the veins are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks downwards on each side a black vein:
so feel both and do not go too deep, because below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly felt are felt in two ways:
either by pricking at one whole flame-like vein quite wide, or an olive shaped subtle one like a furrow which is called 'anesis'; and they are wide and fine according to the width and depth of the veins. The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the veins that are  flat and full of large, apparent blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive flame:
and is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with the illnesses that are under the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly.
And it behooves the bloodletter to bleed wisely, and to beware of the artery which is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and a torrent of blood comes out, then it behooves him to clamp it as I have said. And the flame must not prick, but cut like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you should extract it and change another one; or you want no vein of it, or you cut into its place in the arm: it opens manifestly; and apply the flame like a knife, as we have said.
And if you know to recognize the place of the vein, then thus it is proper that you draw out the arm so that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place with a cinch, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with the flame knife.
And guard that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery; therefore avoid it.
And if you see it welling up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: Hasten yourself therefore, and put your loin upon length, then remove your loin if it is without stain, which many times happens.
Bind his arm and leave it so, and do not move it the patient; and be in fear, and do not move it until it is sound.
And if the loin is not stained and it pains you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the vein; and stain the loin.
And take a strip of fig bark, and pound it, and take one of the halves and tie it well up to the other day.
If the wound is already clean, that is good; if it is not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping of bleeding is not always easy in many circumstances because of the smallness of the wound and the weakness of the arm's vein.
The blood from the vein in the middle helps treat blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica [vein] and the cephalic [vein], as we have said.
and it is necessary for the healer to go near for the nerve that is below, and if he does not feel it too much, and he finds the nerve, and he swells and the healer be grieved, and perhaps cannot heal him;
and this nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you heal him with the instrument aneth; and push the nerve with your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision long.
The blood of the cephalic vein so helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
And it is necessary to vein at the flame olive or the flame myrtle, because it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerves nor arteries.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest spot, and it does not matter if it is missed the first time, and one recommences. And by chance, the veins may swell in some men, even if it is missed the first time, but it does not matter. The quality of blood is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is administered only to preserve health,
and to ward off future diseases; and it should be done in one of the three veins which are or cut: namely, cephalic,  faste, and basillic; and one should bleed at the beginning of Lent to June, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one should bleed on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The bleeding that is administered to diseases has no set hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and at all times.
and it is not fitting to bleed children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying for more than four months until the seventh. Do not bleed those who have passed sixty years.
And when some want to be bled, in any manner whatsoever, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema, if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous impurities harmful to the principal members;
Do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they remain so, nor the dropsy-ridden.
And if one worsens after colic passion, and vomiting, and belly pain, and multiplication of labor in women, and travail, of vigil and fasting, and those that all virtue, or by thing of the weapon or of the body.
Then subtly the humors, if one is fat, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power.
Then enter or bath, if nothing defends it, to subtly the blood.
And you heal of the vein of the worse entrails the third, as we have said.
and guard yourself on that day from work, and from pain, and from lust, and from similar things.
and be tied and joyful, and let the healer's hands be higher than those of the one who is healed, and rub the arm two or three times.
then restrain the thread in the middle, for when it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct the limb.
and then rub the place with his hands until the veins swell and are felt.
Then moisten the skin with a little bit of old oil, then place his finger of his left hand upon that vein beneath its location a little where he wishes to bleed. That the vein may not be closed and fail to bleed. For there are veins that close as tightly as cords when bleeding, and some that are filled with windiness, so that when one puts upon the flame, it withdraws the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these.
and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, for that reason it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, it begins again a little below where it was or above the swelling, if the area isn't swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient is alarmed, let him leave it for one or two days, and don't tie up the arm: for perhaps an abscess will come; nor does he go into a bath, then begin bleeding again if it pleases him.
and if the opening is small, or the vein is fine and subtle, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening directly into the whole flame;
and work a little carefully, so that the veins become inflamed; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, do not start bleeding again, and put a little bit of olive oil on it, for it soothes the body from blood, and is more suitable in this place than the ointment;
and thus administer the olive oil to each vein that you open to stanch the flow of blood;
and that same thing is tripled and bowed out of it, when it is put back in place; so subtle is the sinew and it separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is drained only once or at the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and some hot oil, and restrain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the outflow of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place afterwards for a few days without any blackness or greening, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on no thing of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamine, mustard, or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put therefore your hand on it, and if you find its place soft to the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance evil. Therefore avoid that you put on it anything of those we have said, because by chance it lacks the artery; but let it have .i. dry plaster to harden the place, then the cure of another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it drain until it becomes red; and if you see it swollen, let it shrink until it becomes smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for one who is pale and weak, and needs bloodletting, that one makes a larger wound, and the flames are wide.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed him little by little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from the loss of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is better than bleeding with a long or wide incision.
And to the one whose body needs to be bled, it is necessary to give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if it is dried out, treat the blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, give him soft bread soaked before the bleeding in syrup made with figs, or in syrup of honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints after the bleeding, it is necessary that he drinks broth of meat and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed his arm, and another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he should bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And who wants to bleed his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to be bled from another place, then he must be bled on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood within the body which is already exhausted, and brings fever; so in this case it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening so that it flows in streams; since you have taken care of all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, that death may not come in place of a pulse and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it is not right when you see a person's arm, and make blood flow the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully on it; but if it is curved, let him extend his arm as much as possible, for this would be bad;
but let it stay until it heals the second time; or you point it at the tip of the flame, as long as the vein that is frozen to be cut from there has appeared. and put on top i. piece of silk put back in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and don't constrict it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, let it heal in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein taken from the arm is bled at the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red;
then be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed it now through the middle, neither short nor long;
and let the opening be wide, and bleed it well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot draw it out, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not thrust the hand into hot water, because one puts it in more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, for it has no artery nor nerve.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
strait (or bind) the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; And if it is healthy crookedly, and if you cut it through entirely, it will not grieve anything.
And do not cut too much into it, because the nerves are beneath all without flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water, if it is frozen in the wound and cannot be moved out.
And when you have treated the blood as is necessary, then put oil and a cloth on top of the vein to soothe it well, and so do for each vein.
The vein of them in the left hand is as good for the disease of the mouse, and do all just as I have told you towards right.
The vein of the saphenous is as good for all the diseases that are below the body. as with the diseases of the legs, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and old leg, and similar illnesses.
And the qualities of this vein are that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it warms up, and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many reins.
So seize then the wider rein, or at the ankle, where it is worth more.
And if you seize it on the foot, guard the nerves that are below, and seize it by traversing it as in cutting; and let the flames be annealed.
And if he cannot pull out with the seizing, put the foot in the water and let the vein be well drained.
And if the first wound is not successful, begin the second above it a little, because the skin is salty. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the same incision from the other foot.
The skin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle's lower part, and its incision benefits the pain in the hip when it is hot blood.
And the qualities of its incision are that the patient enters a bath and is strained above the ankle four fingers' width by twisting,
for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then sew it in all the ways that you can, and across and it is better that you cut it, because the blood is dry, and it is much replenished with hands of men.
and it is better that you cut it, because the blood is dry, and it is much replenished with hands of men. And if you do not find it, then sew any vein that opens or on the back of the foot, and towards the small toe, and ward off the nerves.
and make as much bloodletting as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed.
Of the leech cups
Leeches cups are made of horn, or resin, or glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction which is without pricking is done in two ways: either it is done with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the suction under the chin; and the suction on the two shoulders; and the suction above the hips; and the suctions in the two arms; and the suctions on the two legs; and the cupping glasses on the two ankles; and cupping does not treat blood, but of small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and for this reason it weakens one less, as is done with bloodletting from a vein; and it is not fitting that it be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, as long as the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to cupping, or for customs, then let us administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and every hour, in each time;
for there are some who, when they have need to ventilate, have heavy head;
and those who experience congestion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see through mist with blood and worms and corpses and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed from the month, we command them to fast after three hours of the day.
The vein from the temple helps with the pain of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting that this be done after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this venting is in place of the vein from the head,
and it is not fitting for those who are of cold complexion to use it, or who have a fever, because it causes them great discomfort;
And for this reason it is not fitting for the elderly to use it, nor those who have or head colds diseases.
And he who heals from it often becomes oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Cupping on the neck is in place of the pain from the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the treatment of the worse. and to the splitting of the channel of the backbone, and to all kinds of things, and to fullness;
and then it is necessary to put it carefully, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause obstruction or in the stomach and heart.
The ventilations of the two ribs of the neck are good against pains in the head and headaches and migraines, and in strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the operator to express his hand when he puts it, so that he does not cut the artery, and there comes a hemorrhage.
The ventilations below the chin are good for mouth ailments, and gum disease, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for the illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as valuable as three veins in the arm. for it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient not to touch it too much, because its flesh is thin and lies over nerves and arteries.
The leech which is on the rump is good as for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the leech be large, and be of iron, that she has need to well suck; and perhaps, if she were subtle, she would break; and then she makes great wounds.
The leeches of the legs are applied openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soothe the flowers; and are in their place at the two shins, and the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
The manner of putting the leech is that you put it first empty, and suck temperately, and put it on gently, and move it equally, and do not cease to do this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the color of blood; then finish, and replace the leeches, and take care in the disposition of the body, because there are some who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make broad wounds, and a poke deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to make two incisions: the first time to subtly open the way of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to make a third incision; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only prick once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we start over frequently; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it further, and the end is that the vessels are pierced strongly.
And it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have many pores, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with oil that is appetizing and dissolving: If it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of gourd;
And if it is in winter, of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or dill oil, and similar things.
And if the one being treated has tender skin and large pores, then it is not necessary to put any oil on;
but it is necessary to wash after the suction of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of gourd, or water of porcelain, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture, rise from ease with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses rise with old wine, or water of saffron, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or others similar;
and it is not proper to suck blood before a bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after suction.
and it is necessary that he should wind, when he must wind and when he is windy. And ward the one who has a healthy, is choleric, and if his stomach is too much inflamed. if it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the meal, and similar things;
and mince onions, and mutton roast, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mince poppyseed, and quince seeds and small onions and pigeons;
And on the day that he will fast, he must drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give no man at any time triacle or musk before or after the ventosaion, in order to comfort the principal limbs. And let it be subtle the wine, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The suction cups that are applied without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and gout, and on the belly and the back and the loins and the hip, because these members do not suffer being pricked on their own.
and they are only done to draw blood from member to member, as we put them on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put suction cups on the belly and on the back to reduce the size of the member.
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as by its attractive virtue it may chance to remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place.
and thus he does when one puts it upon the liver and the spleen when there is retained windiness.
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water,
as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs are cooked suitable for this.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And have two boards of width and half palm from end to end, and have on the side or in the middle one small hole, as for inserting a needle
and let it be of rain, soft before so that it does not sting the patient when placing it on the limb;
and have in the middle a stick of wood or iron across, for placing a burning candle;
and let them be large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
for the suction cups of children are other than of old people, and of the thin ones than of the fat ones.
And must one thus put this suction cup upon the limb:
Embracing the candle of wax or .i. ointment, and put it in the suction cup through the rod that is in the suction cup, so that the brightness be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and you must do as on the hole that we have said, so that when one wants, vapor goes in, and one removes the suction;
and apply the lining as before, and repeat it often, if you need it.
Therefore, the suction which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, for every acute pain, has no rod nor hole, and it is administered only when it is full of liquid, and is placed on the limb for so long.
and this is the form:
Wounds are not treated except in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things. and in their denuded flesh, such as two or three, and other similar things;
And the qualities of the user are that when you find wounds that are in clear sweet waters without pus, take them;
and put them in clean water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then it shall be cured by leeching and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultice.
and when they are flat and fall off, if it is where one can put cupping, put it there, because this does much good.
If those do not, then lift the place with ease, and then with water, very well, and then swab it;
and if the wound heals too much after the poultice, moisten one linen cloth in cold water and put it on top, until the swelling is reduced;
and if the sores are multiplied, then put on it ground vitriol, or alum, and similar things, until it is spread.
or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and let them remain until they dry on the place, then it will now stop.
and if you need more, then take other bandages.
And if the bandages will not be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you stick a needle into it until the sores  bleed. and then place them above, and as soon as they feel the blood, they become heated.
and when you see that they are oozing, sprinkle on a bit of aloe and silk ground together, or ashes, they will now heal.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know, dear child, that the teachings of this chapter, they will not find in any of the ancient books, nor will anyone have read letters from them;
And for this reason, knowledge is rare in our land, because I never found any good one.
And I know nothing of it, except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered its science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I have done in these 2 chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say here in the prologue of this book the sum of the word and the chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you haste to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing hinders it, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age;
or if the tension is not very hot, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say, cold meats, and venison, and mutton, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill himself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; so that the patient returns to his first rule that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testae, and pies, and vetch belly, and eels, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment it regains strength and the fracture heals more quickly.
And know that the bones of the old and the decrepit do not heal well or solder together according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of little children;
But has no cure, reset on the broken bone that is, large tendons which are joined and join the limb together, as much as it was before; and not all points of its work, and for this it is necessary to feed on thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or of the thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go to the shaft and others that are sharp, like the point of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go to the shaft and others that are sharp, like the point of a pen for writing. And if with a fracture, and a break with a small crack.
And to each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place;
And is known the fracture of the bone by those that the joint is twisted, and opens well by outward appearance, and feels by the pressure of the hand;
And when there is no twisting nor feeling upon touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture;
but it may well have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture. If you must not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after, and then restrain it carefully.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and are the two parts disjointed, it is now necessary to put them together equally, so that abscesses may not come.
And if abscesses come there, let him not touch it for a day until the abscesses are calmed. Then place it evenly in the joint as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of him who has parts; then restrain, as is fitting afterward.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it is one small limb, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move by all means the additions in their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And the patient feels it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well; then draw it beautifully, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come from their abscess work hot and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is in place, so carefully instruct the patient that he does not move it, neither while watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner. And guard well that the limb be so secured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it behooves to put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it behooves to put it in such a position that he feels no pain; And guard that it be set straight, that no twisting comes when it is restored.
And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: so it is fitting to enwrap them in soft and fine linen bandages;
And those who are large, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to envelop them with a wide and hard linen band, because the wide linen embraces the whole great limb, and restrains it from all sides equally, so that there is no lump.
Then tie over light bandages, 3 or 4 tours according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little to all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, than the fracture then distances a little the fracture.
And soften the linen bit by bit, until you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another linen, and turn it around right above the broken place;
then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, neither too forcefully nor too weakly, as we have said in the first place above.
then put between the bandages of linen or cloth, until it is all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, put something soothing for the abscess on top, and which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days.
Then restrain with your dressings, and let them be half the width of a well-made cane or from the wood from which clefts are made, or from palm branches, and let them be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint put on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as is necessary for the limb of smallness or largeness;
then bind it on the splints just as you did in the first hour, then tie above it a thread evenly, just as in the first hour on the fracture;
tighter is more above, less below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
for if the thread is thick, as I have seen from fools who make their works with threads of linen twisted ropes, and that is a great error, for the suture cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not become that it has between each stitch less than two finger spaces.
And if the patient is bothered by the points of the stitches after tightening them in their healthy parts, put underneath them pads of linen, or wool fleece, so that he does not become sore.
When the wound is with the break, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure here after.
And know that it is not fitting to bind all broken limbs on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put splints on it for that after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of abscesses happening.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and it is mixed with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, not too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in many dispositions, and even to women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another way of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three parts each of  bark, ladani,  henbane, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mucilage, ana x; myrrh and aloes, ana v; alechil viii; and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is good for many men.
Another way to make an ointment that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana .x. z.; myrrh and aloes, ana .viiij. z.; acacia vi. z.; Armenian bole .x. z., and grind it well, and confit with water or abun of egg, and administer it.
Another way of making an ointment for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and it soothes the pain that occurs, and use it on the bone fracture, and bruising: take new linen, and moisten it in oil and heat it, and put it on the sore place. This plaster does not restore [the joint], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removing pain properly.
Another way to make an ointment that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth laurel leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of ointment for the restoration of the fracture of the bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of verbena, each one part; and grind, and confection with wine, and if the limb is burned, confection with coriander water moist, or water, and use.
Another manner of ointment stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and seeds of flax, wallflower, melilot, and henbane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and confection with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ipocras states in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only a certain one made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be between two not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen one should put upon the broken member, to restore, things dry a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and heads of worms decocted, or feathers of ostrich, and mallow, and silk equally, and grind them up, and make a plaster of it and lay it on.
And then remove the plaster a little after, and be careful if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, remove it by no means for days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, lack of rest, or swelling, then hurry, and remove the plaster, and take away the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and plunge it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the member rest an hour, then put on a dry cloth, half in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
And rest the inflammation of the member, and be removed the pain, then begin again the subtle bandage, and a little plaster, and do not restrain it as strongly as before; and subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and pain and swelling are entirely gone, and you need plaster and bandage, then begin again as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of those things we have said comes to the member, then do not unbandage it before 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days; and never leave it  for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and approaches the fitting of the flesh together.
Therefore, he should be restrained more than before, and you make his flesh thicker, as I have said before; and if you see that the place is drying more than necessary, know that there cannot come any nourishment. Therefore, apply hot water bath to him every time you loosen him, and once every three days, and wash the sore a little.
Therefore, through this work, he will nourish the limb and quickly mend those who foolishly make it crooked; which is bad, and so are these perilous workings, and I see nothing but to leave it and work it straight.
Of various kinds of fracture Many kinds of fractures are there, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined;
For there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collarbone all the bone up to its end which is under the bone, like it is made high or thick; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Or the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or a splitting or of the collarbone of the stone, or of the head on the stone, or similar things.
And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the skin that is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound which is rejoined in the bone as subtly as a thread, and the fracture is small, and for this reason this fracture is called “capillary”;
and if the wound which is made either by a blow of stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and causes the piece of bone to go inward, and it is joined like a bellows when they forge on the cauldrons; so that the stone enters inside.
And this happens more to those who have porous bones, such as children's heads;
and there are in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are scattered as if they were stars; and I will speak of it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of fractures by deduction on them, and the inquiry at their tendons, and by the corrupt cartilage which is on them.
The appearance of capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs it gently, the black fracture appears.
In the cure of the fracture, take heed to the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes becoming watery and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an impossible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the skin beneath the bone does not rot and comes the accident that we have said.
And if the bone fracture comes as far as the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the cracked part thus: and it is that you prick the head of the wounded person and uncover above the bone in every way that you can, and on the figure of the wound more carefully than you can.
and if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or an abscess appears, help with what is necessary, and that you fill the place with soft cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be sure of bleeding; then begin to prepare around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of working: one way is that you cut a narrow piece in front, and this is the shape:
And then make another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of cuts of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, both pointed and of iron, and work lightly so that you do not break the head.
And if the bone is hard and rough, it is necessary that you pierce it first, so that you administer splints with drill bits, do not make them go beyond the bone, and should have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have more of these, so that each one comes in its place from the thickness of the bone, so that you have splints for all bones; and this is the shape of three types of splints:
The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one drill bit on the bone, and turn at your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill bit elsewhere a little later, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like pliers, tweezers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the syfac.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you remove the debris which is detached from the bone with every instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more sharp and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then lightly shave the bones with i. instruments; then dress the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of treatment is that Galen says, which is drier; and praise it greatly, and that is his word. It is first necessary that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the broken part appears exposed, so that when you have uncovered that portion, you will place under the head of this lens-shaped incision tool, for this is its shape:
And do not cut from one side, and it is the pointed part on two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike lightly with a small hammer on top, so that you gently break the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is stuck to the bone, gently remove it, because it is well removed with no pain, and without fear.
And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reapply this asperity, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, to apply in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and figure of the fracture.
If you begin with large razors, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease to do this until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you apply care according to its requirement; and this thing is not well responded to by anyone who has placed his study in this art.
And if the ulcer is uncovered, it is necessary that you take one sheet of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another sheet doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first sheet; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not damage the ulcer, then administer above one other linen, and do not bind it too tightly except that it holds the wound only;
and leave it so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and powder of veves, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer further medicines moistened without mordication;
And guard that the wound be entirely clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor let it be joined with a bandage, for when a bandage is assembled over the skin of the brain, it will corrode and blister, and happen to the patient great malice; because when one puts on above this biting thing, it bites from above.
Therefore, take ward, so that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
And if the blackness does not come from outside but because of the medicine we have put on, that it has virtue, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue one cloth, and put it on the ulcer. then the cure of manners of cures as it is fitting, until it is healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the lower jaw are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and this one below is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your small finger or the point of the jaw into its place, and put each fracture inside with your index finger, and to the palm outside, until the jaw returns according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and the bone cannot come to its place, then it behoves you to put it even at the head of a stick a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another splint, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
if not, after the seventh or the tenth, when the pus is calmed, then bind to the head of the knee ten bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one on the other side if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
And they say any restorer must wet the tents with oil and change them each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with a preparation of alum of egg white, and powdered molin; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and if a thin cloth is wrapped around it, and the wound adheres, and blows on the patient; do what you want.
And if an abscess comes to the boil while you are working on it, put a piece of cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or one spoonful of diachylon.
And if an abscess does not come to a head, put a poultice from the outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, congealed with egg yolk, then put light dressings on top, and do not bind them at all or tie them.
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments to that, then sew up the wound, and treat it with things containing fat, and ointments, and suitable plasters to that;
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put on splints of wood, until it is healed.
of the jaw rupture
When the jaw is broken apart below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outside and not broken in two, except that it splinters inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the mouth of the sick person; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger in and gently push the fracture inward, and fix it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jawbone fracture is separated into two pieces, then it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw cerote, and place on it one double drapel; and place on the drapel a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and place a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg or flaxseed flour, after which you have removed the cerote; and place a light linen cloth on top of the plaster, and if the plasters adhere, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of the bone is removed; so subtle of the remove with instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and none remain, then close the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable for this, to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: or it is broken and severed in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each part of the fracture to your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance or flaw.
And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or wool, and be it large according to your need; and being and lightly lifting the bone, and straining the sphere with your hand, so that you put each part of the fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes in its way, then it is necessary that the patient lie supine on his bed, and put below the shoulder one hour glass full, and shove the ministers’ shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
And then apply the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split it upwards; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any raising, then cut one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, to ward off the sifac.
And it seems like a spoon, and is not much hollowed out, and be also wide as it is convenient, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the rupture of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure of the hot abscess, if cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt hot abscess, if apply the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, moisten one bandage in rose oil and honey and wine, and put it on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and incisions, is that you put on the bone a plaster of ground flaxseed and yolk of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a spear under the ass, if you need it. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm width, then put one double bandage on top of the bandages and plaster; then take a thin strip of three digits in width and length, and wrap it around the banded one so that the head of the bandage hangs down; And place the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; and move each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it.
And make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps one small pillow under the shoulder, to lift the arm up; so it will lighten the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until twenty days.
Then restart the splint if you see that he needs it, and restrain and leave him so, until he is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in fewer for some people.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or its wide place does not return to its middle, and one feels it only by touching; then set it according to the figure of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the spot powder from the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on .i. double drape. Then put a broad and subtle splint on top, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is attached in any place of the shoulder, use those hairs as splints of linen, so that the splint lies equally; then strap it tightly with a very large bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and watch the connection every day. And whenever it softens, tighten it again, and put the splint back in its place if it is out, and lie the patient on his side. And the shoulder will be restored in .xx. days or in xxv. And when this number is fulfilled, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that moves easily.
And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and not below the heart, then do as before, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the arm to appease an abscess hot.
of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it bends downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and a lack of strength, and thirst, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the seams in the broken bone, and it feels well all around.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and put .i. cushion between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the sides of the two bones with your hands, and subtly bring them in all ways as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put plasters and bandages over the fine layer of salt, or another light cloth, and wrap it in .i. bandage, and tie it above the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage round at the back, and restrain it firmly, and rewind every hour the strap, and if it loosens, tighten it; and if it is necessary to untie it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, and wipe off the plaster, and address what has come there in ways of cures; then put back the plaster, and restrain it until it is healed.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only for that cause because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry as to the two sides.
And the restoration is that you put equal the breaking, as it befits. And then put the plaster, and the restraint of a splint, if you have need of it.
And if the breaking of the ribs is inclining inwards, the patient feels very great pain, and pricking, as well as from pleurisy, for the bone pierces the membrane; and besides prickings, and all and vomiting great plants of blood, and it is of grief sickness, and the ancients have put great engines there.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to expel the wind from within.
We do not do this, except for hot abscesses, if they have not already come. And if it has already come, then treat it.
And they say none of us put suction cups on the spot in order to draw out fluids forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not draw the superfluities to the location for the purpose of weakness.
And they say any one of you must cover the place with wool moistened in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the middle part, then be cured of the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone pointing through the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under one instrument to guard the syfac; and then one must drill the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. And if an abscess appears, then place damp cloths in rose oil, and place it on the spot; and treat as long as the place needs an abscess, and lying supine on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and it sometimes happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the sick person will be cured, if care is taken of him.
And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his legs are softened, and if there is an accident there which are in hands, and on his back there is a spitting up and evacuation without volition; and when he is laid on his belly, he spits up without volition. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, it is lighter.
And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a linen bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as it is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover on the joint; and remove the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture; then cure with an ointment that promotes healing, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," put your fist of your left hand in there, and make it even with the other hand on your power, then put on the plaster and splint, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do this again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It happens sometimes that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, if it had not been for a little lessening at the top; and making it long, and declining to the side, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and tingling, and swells what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upon it, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the figure of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, then put equal the fracture, as long as it is to natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, then make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you. And when you have put it even, place it on the board, then place on a splint of wood or of cork, and restrain the splints so that it does not move; and apply the bandage under the ribs until the wound is healed.
And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess comes to the boil, do not touch it until the abscess boils over, and place on it what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The adjuitor is that which is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of two ways: one of which is that you take one stick of moderate thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends to two cords, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on one seat; then lay the broken arm on the stick, as far as it comes to the armpit, and has a curvature of the stick in it, then put upon any heavy thing or ministers it to extend downwards; then put the splints together equally with their hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all one lien, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more far, then restrain .i. linen under the fracture, and on the fracture, and extend each minister to its side. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put .i. linen in the middle under the seat, and .i. other towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary to put .i. linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the side, and on the outside; then set the fracture as it is necessary, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come there.
And if an abscess appears there, then do not restrain it until .vii. days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in oil rose, until the abscess is appeased; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the bandage over the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in place of its stars, unless anything prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. pair of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture .iii. pairs on each side; then restrain on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less apart.
And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess hot, so leave it to be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the bandage, that itching nor swelling nor inflammation comes to the place, or the dressings cannot come to the member for because it is too much inflamed. If it proceeds, as we have said.
And if none such accidents come, so do not unbind it except after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool equally, and look each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or be loosened the bonds; if it proceeds by the virtue of medicine, and then give him the food that we have before set out, in such a manner that the food is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken again in forty days of all; and then one must unbind and administer bath and medicines of ointment for the place to heal. And if the constriction is bad and congested, so stay unbinding for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fosciles», because one is small, and it is the one that follows the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little joint; perhaps breaks the large foscile alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken alone, then it should be carefully extended and set straight.
And if it is the large foscile, then it should be pulled more firmly; and place it on one cushion, and hold the shoulder of the hand higher than the others, and the little joints lower than the other joints, and let the patient be crossed upon himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the part below his hand, or at one point, and some other ministers at another above. And then place the members even, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that grasps the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as above on the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take the treatment.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, glue it; i.e., a cloth bandage made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind it above subtly, until the abscesses are calmed. And then remove the wax, and put the ointment of ground flour with an abundance of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be slightly more outside, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have 6 splints or arms in more dispositions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and bind more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less away from it, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, by which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the limb after some days. And if some bad accidents come to the limb, as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water, until the itchings be appeased; and let the limb not at all rest. And then begin again the tightening, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and seeming things, so the address.
And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave so some days, until the numbing corrects itself, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen it until 20 days, or until when necessary, then let him put his hands to his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and us in our two there are few fractures, and it comes but only many times a sprain.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behooves the patient to sit crossed-legged, and lie straight before him also; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the fingers the bones that are broken, and put them aligned with the middle, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the palm near to the belly of the hand, do a sphere of cloths, and command the patient that he holds it on his broken palm; and then the strain of a long cloth, and be the splint of core soft as big as the palm of the hand, and the strain, as it behooveth.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then bind it tightly around the hand, and bandage the linen between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two, if it is the wrist, set it straight, as it should; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or any of the others, set it straight, and bind it with the sound finger that is next; or you bind them all together in one band, which way is best, or put a splint on top, like a wristband; and take heed in the restoration and disposition of hot and dry abscesses, and care for what comes to it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and well one sees it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is so tied  1 above the fracture, and 1 below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his band to his part equally; and that is when the fracture is removed from the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one of the bands should be towards the groin, and the other band below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, then let the bands be below the knee, and let the extension be downward; then put the splint on the bone with your two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put the plaster, and the ligature, if an abscess does not come.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and your cure; the best way is done in such a manner. It is necessary that you wrap on the fracture, i.e., bandaged hard doubled in two or three, and keep the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put one long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and bring the head of the thread upwards; then turn on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal tightening, then begin to tie in three or four turns on the fracture; and as you go higher up from the fracture, and less tighten it; then take hold of the two heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and bind three splints that are above, then return downwards to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, then that there comes no abscess or swelling or any other semblance.
And if it happens, then untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in this restoration made like that, it does not harm the patient.
And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the knee joint
Know that in the knee joint there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or one opening, and it has both wounds and no wound, and it is felt well by all.
And the restoration is that one puts equal each thing which is round to its parts, as long as it is assembled moves one can; then put the splint, and in it puts a round bandage, if you have need of it, and restrain it as it suits, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, such as hot abscess and similar; so puts at each accident what it needs him, as long as it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, for one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and all kinds of fractures come as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns downwards. Therefore, administer extension, and put it straight, and bind the bones evenly; but nonetheless, it behoves that if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your virtue.
And when you have accomplished your work entirely, take two fasces of shaved wood that reach around the leg on both sides, and be as long as the leg from the knee downwards; then wrap in two layers one bandage above and below, and bind it in the middle as well, and at this binding, the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good. And none administer one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and place it on the leg to ward off movement, and properly made one does this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or any other accident; treat thus until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bones of the foot
To the ankle there comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot there comes sometimes fracture and to the two toes, and there happen only few things in more disorders.
And if there happens the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot upon his, where the bones are raised, and then press it so that they return to their places; then put the splint and bandages on, and under the belly of the foot put a small table to 2 fingers wide, then restrain the foot firmly, then that you have wrapped bandages, and other things which you need.
And when 3 days or 4 will have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones, restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand; then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one finger's width wider, then place under the foot the board that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and restrain the board under the foot; and let it remain on the head of the board above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and accord to each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, then make her sit down enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and be held from behind; then fill the place of nature with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then turn over the woman, and lift her back up and down, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and so do for seven days or around: so shall be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a sheep bladder, and tie a cane to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the cane form, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thumb of the man or woman is broken, then restore it as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures near are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into them, and understands my book. For the fracture signifies to more dispositions the right way of restoration: understand therefore.
In the shaft, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put the shaft into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or around, and it will be healed quickly.
Of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to them.
And if the wound heals, then retain the vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in that same hour, or that day, if pus does not come.
And if pus does come, then let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident upon it.
And if the broken bone is apparent on the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to set it gently with your hands, by slight extension.
And if the extension does not appear fit to put it straight with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. or .viij. in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary that the worker grasps .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason it behooves the curved head to be placed on the top of the apparent bone; and thrust it once, until it returns, and be straight against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take hold of the bone, then it behoves you to cut the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has purchase.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either incisor or saw, to your power; then set what remains in the bone of sharpness and fine scraps.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as it can be in its place, then moisten one drape in black spiced wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put on the wound anything but cerote or something else where there is oil, so that it does not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be well guarded that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times have fools done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corrosion any time; and let the strainings be softer and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not fitting to put splints on; but surround, in place of splints, hard wraps, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two an opening appear at the wound, then remove what you have put on with all wine, and there put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar things.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limbs be supported in such a manner that the bow pulls down gently.
And if that day passes, and it cannot heal but returns to the bow's place again, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must cleanse the wound with a tent, and remove all those scattered pieces that cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or some other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hipbone or shoulder, and similar large bones, do not treat it at all, because many times death comes from it; but let it be until it decays; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, it will fall out by itself, then you can treat the wound if you are able. And if you are unable, leave it alone.
of blows that come from the shoulder
We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing to see is the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot make the limbs its natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if he administers medicines astringent, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and cook them with astringent wine or with egg white or with the yolk; and put them on the wound in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not loosen it in hands during days; and then loosen it, and begin another, until the nodes are removed; or you restrain on a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the node is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so cut above it, and make the superfluity apparent; or you return it to any razor, as long as it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly, and not as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and the member cannot come to its nourishment; or because of too much pain; or because of too great movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and leisure; then put bandages on the limb, so that the bandage draws to the great nourishment, and the pain often diminishes with water bath, until the nourishment returns to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
the limb after the healing
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and brings great evils, and perhaps death; however, if the knots and the torments are fresh, then it is necessary that they be risen with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of wormwood, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make i. a softening plaster, such as diaquilon well made, and you take the fleece of wormwood, and you confit it with geline fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster above; or you take fig grease, and grind it with chaff of flax, and similar medicines that diminish the swelling.
And at no time is the knot removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. And be it brought movement to the limb each hour.
And if the twistiness is ingrained and hardened, as well as stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle incisor lightly; and put cushions and study in the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
A dislocation is from a joint moving out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is badly aligned, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it is now necessary to bring it back without resorting to splints.
Because if one delays, it swells the limbs, and perhaps when one tries to put it back in its place with pain; for this reason it is not good to move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings on numbness and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if the patient is healthy, then let him, until the abscesses have each been appeased; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then move it gently, and cure each member as they come in their place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated in this way, and the dislocations of both sides are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit taken from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and surrounds his tongue with the word.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it carefully, and do not shrink back.
And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and puts their hand pocket from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other two hands be outside, to put it straight; and command the patient to soften them, his mandibles, and move them in every way.
And the minister puts it straight, until it returns to its place.
And if it is set with pain, even if it are the two jaws together, then rose them with hot water and oil, as long as you reset them lightly; do not worry about resetting it, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then put on a cloth moistened in a concoction made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to bite, but takes light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are united.
and then gently move it and do not work to open the mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is well healed and sound.
And if the two jaws cannot be set back in place within an hour and are not turned to their places, then comes fever and accustomed chills, and perhaps a bellyache, and perhaps vomiting of pure phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is perilous; and many times die those who have it within eight days.
from the fork
The harness cannot dislocate from the side inside the continuation of it and the hip, and is dislocated no time at the outside, and well one feels it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and stretches his arms; and then presses the place firmly with his palm, and it returns; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it.
And the shoulder that is towards the hip cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way, the shoulder blade is brought back when it is out of place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one is when it is dislocated to the side of the socket down; and the second is to the side of the armpit; and sometimes it is dislocated upwards, but this happens little.
and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder, and it is not dislocated inwards towards the nerves; and many times it is dislocated downwards towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because in these it comes out easily; in those who have enough flesh, it comes out with difficulty, and goes back with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, it is necessary that you feel it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the cure.
And dislocation is known when it is pulled down towards the buttock, and it makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the buttock to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to their body, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly upon touching.
and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise to bring back, when it is new, or when the child is sickly.
And the manner is that the ministers raise the hand of the sick person up, then put their palms below the seat, and raise the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers raise the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it down; so come gently.
And if it does not come as we have said with hands in several days afterwards, then it befits that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister should administer a softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be administered.
then be it that the sick person is laid on their back, and put under the seat a cloth of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put his heel upon the cloth, and raise the head of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the hand of the sick person;
And other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns now, and if you see it so reset according to this manner:
And it is that you make present one man who is larger than the patient; and be right towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; And other ministers pull the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so hang with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and it is one long stick in the ground, whose head be as thick as a pistol, and not too thick nor too thin; Then the patient is laid down, but he has a soft cloth above and the patient lies long on the shaft; then his arm is stretched out on the other side, forming, and the joint will return to its place immediately.
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one piece of wood from two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a pointed head to enter into the joint below the joint, according to this form.
Then tie on the head of the shaft a soft cloth so that the shaft does not sting the patient, then put it under the joint of the patient; and extend his arm above the shaft, and tie the shoulder to the shaft, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm upon one rung of a ladder wide, and let the hands be stretched out, and let the body hang on the other side: now the joint will return.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that may be, so it is necessary that you place under the saddle a sphere of wool equal, then put the emplastre apart with powder of the mill, with incense and aubun of an egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain under the saddle carefully, and turn the linen on the emplastre, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he moisten slightly, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal faster; and then moisten more after .v. days or .vij., and move it; and if it is hardened and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is moved from its place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is shown in front of or chapter of cautery.
And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the buttock, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by thrusting and stretching of hands, and there is administered another place; and care until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then the patient uses baths many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the hip
Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated in several places, and it returns in several places; and if it is dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the hip of the patient with the healthy one, if you see it clearly. Because the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the leg, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it so that the abscesses come from within, because if they came from outside, it would be harmful to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back entirely in any way, especially when it is at the back; therefore it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And the restoration is thus, when it is such that it can be brought back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms should be spread, and the hands placed in accordance with the cut around, above and below, and push the joint to its shoulders together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it comes back when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firming the root of the palm the cut that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it from two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm on each side, after which you have enveloped a double long and wide sheet;
and when the mirror at the joint to its hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then put the joint together, until it returns.
and when it is in its place, put on a dry plaster with beaten egg white, and hold it together, and bend the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, begin again with the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the setting of the joint, and it moves, bathe him and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or put on the joint a fleece of fat sheepskin, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bandage back on, and then get into the bath; and do this .ii. times or .iii., until he is healed; and if you see, place on top hay of moist chaff heated with butter, and strain it over; it will return to its place.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocated, and the return is light, more than the other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell, or come an abscess hot.
And the resetting is that you put the injured hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table at extension and at resetting. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If this is not the case, put a poultice of soothing emplastrum on top of it and leave it so without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint remains crooked.
And it does not harm the patient except that while the hand is weak, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other remedy except to tighten with a cautery near the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, then tighten it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At no time are the fingers of the hand dislocated on one side, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly.
therefore are the fingers, and push the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and lean it towards the part where it is disjoined;
and leave it for 2 days, and then put it straight every day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it every day, and make it move, and re-tie it. And do this often, until it is tight,
and also do so, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do so, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or the neck is dislocated, or if there are several dislocations, there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the limbs jump suddenly without will, and cannot be held, and many times the limbs are softened, either both thighs or both arms or one.
And many times the bone moves at four parts; that which moves in the rear is called "gilbosite":
The cure for this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood; if there is no cure nor healing of all.
And that which comes from falling or percussion or similar things, said the ancient manners of cures by great words, where there is not in all great profit;
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various manners.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast beforehand, there is nothing nor feeling.
and also the one that comes directly in two ribs, and one cannot cure except properly the one that comes to the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be extended on his face in one even place, and have support beneath him, that he not blanch.
then put one splint at the head in earth form, and one other at the feet, and tie a linen under the armpits of the patient, and one other at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and the minister knows the limbs, one to the head and the others to the feet, among the two bones;
and be well closed, the splint as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine formed, until it comes back to life.
And if it does not come back with this cure, then take a board of 3 arms long, and put it under the patient, and have the patient be on their side, and push the head of the board under the patient, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the minister's feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it comes back to its place; and if you see it, do it to the turn which turns by hand.
And it is that you place 2 sticks to the head of the sick person of one arm, and towards the feet 2 others, and have between each stick, inside and outside, a palm's width of long.
And have in each stick 1 hole, where the turn goes, and let the sticks be firmly in the earth so that they do not move; and between each 2 sticks have 1 turning stick, on which the linen turns, and have in 2 turnings 2 small sticks of a palm's width long, to turn the turn.
And then tie the linen which is among the assels to the turn towards the head, and the other linen towards the feet to the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn on all the linen, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is leveled, put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the compresses, and then the support of a tablet of .iij. inches long, which covers the place of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then bind it with a linen band, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed;
And if any thing comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the support that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plank,
And sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone which opens, for which one must not have presumption: by chance it would bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only as dislocations, and not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the sick one than the healthy one, and the sick one cannot double his knee at the fire; and there is the part which is below swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes here.
And the sign of him to whom it comes on the outside, is that this accident is contrary to these before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well aligned according to its accomplishment; nonetheless, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee or double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at its place below the ribs.
The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you should examine if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, if there is no cure needed; and it is not necessary for him to have presumption [confidence].
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocations, so haste that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perhaps it will return, and has no need of other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you support one minister strong, and extend the leg strongly to .ii. hands, or to .i. linen that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then the tightens a linen strap across the hips; and another holds the head of the linen;
and extend up and down all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the earth at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, it is necessary to take care of its appearance. When the dislocation is at the back, you must place the patient on their healthy side, then put the linen on the root of the hip, and the part which is below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the forceps;
then grasp with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the affected hip, and extend it outwards firmly: then it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen band above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then be hung from the top of a pole, and be two arms long above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers hold with the sick person who embrace the hip firmly, for the joint now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the end, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has sciatica, and bind one bandage on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also.
then put 2 sticks, 1 at the head and 1 other at the feet, then place 1 stick between the hips of the patient to form it; and have a plant of wet cloths around him, so that he does not feel the cold to the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the one who has eyes puts it equal in his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put on one table, and press him as we have said in the bone setting, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is before, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the one who has eyes his pain to be on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and the extension downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to stretch the patient down or lift him up on the ground, but rather he should be as if his hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and he should be on his face, and the strap extended as we have said above, and one must press on the joint to the table;
and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then adjust the thighs, and put on the splint, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and he rests for three or four days, then untie it, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are equal, strap them as before, and leave it for another three days; then untie it, and let him walk well, as long as the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he cannot bring it to his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will feel his leg at his hip lightly;
And put the plaster on top, and make him raise his leg to his hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not try to walk, as long as the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not set properly, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes broken, and sometimes dislocated completely, inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender in the part where it is dislocated:
The resetting is light, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is only broken.
And when it is dislocated completely, then it behooves you to make the patient sit straight, and hold him .i. ministers except by the leg, above the ankle;
then treat the foot with your right hand, and then with the left .ii. times, then the leg upward, and push the foot beautifully upward;
and do this .ii. times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put .i. stake firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie wrappings around it, so that the patient does not bleed;
Then hold the patient's thigh, and other ministers extend his foot to their hands or to one vein, so that they bind above the ankle; Then extend each minister equally, and the straps be placed between the patient's hips to hold the patient when they are being stretched;
Then place the probes equally on the dislocation in their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg at the thigh, and the dislocation will return smoothly.
And when it is in place, then put the plaster and dressings on top, and strain it firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are above the ankle behind, so that the ligatures be not too tight;
then let it [be] for two or three days, and if the ligatures soften, then strain it; then unbind it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to him, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them well without effort, and this is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on one, that is, the flat surface or on one table totally straight, and put your foot on what is apart from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is equalized, and there is nothing apart from it, then put under the sole of the foot a table to two spans, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, nor rash.
And at the beginning of things use soothing to an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. And when you see hope in it, then reset the limb now, so that the abscess heals as soon as it comes.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the hot abscess, and treat the wound as necessary, with dried bandages;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, set the bones, and do what we have said for simple injuries;
and guard yourself from entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your weapon and body. Amen
